traveling. You hear from her regularly?”

“More or less regularly. She was never much of a letter-writer. She tells
me about her engagements and contracts, but I know so little about that
business that it doesn't mean much to me beyond the figures, which seem
very impressive. We've had a good deal of business correspondence, about
putting up a stone to her father and mother, and, lately, about her
youngest brother, Thor. He is with me now; he drives my car. To-day he's
up at the mine.”

Ottenburg, who had picked up his overcoat, dropped it. “Drives your
car?” he asked incredulously.

“Yes. Thea and I have had a good deal of bother about Thor. We tried a
business college, and an engineering school, but it was no good. Thor
was born a chauffeur before there were cars to drive. He was never good
for anything else; lay around home and collected postage stamps and took
bicycles to pieces, waiting for the automobile to be invented. He's just
as much a part of a car as the steering-gear. I can't find out whether
he likes his job with me or not, or whether he feels any curiosity about
his sister. You can't find anything out from a Kronborg nowadays. The
mother was different.”

Fred plunged into his coat. “Well, it's a queer world, Archie. But
you'll think better of it, if you go to New York. Wish I were going with
you. I'll drop in on you in the morning at about eleven. I want a word
with you about this Interstate Commerce Bill. Good-night.”

Dr. Archie saw his guest to the motor which was waiting below, and then
went back to his library, where he replenished the fire and sat down for
a long smoke. A man of Archie's modest and rather credulous nature
develops late, and makes his largest gain between forty and fifty. At
thirty, indeed, as we have seen, Archie was a soft-hearted boy under a
manly exterior, still whistling to keep up his courage. Prosperity and
large responsibilities--above all, getting free of poor Mrs. Archie--had
brought out a good deal more than he knew was in him. He was thinking
tonight as he sat before the fire, in the comfort he liked so well, that
but for lucky chances, and lucky holes in the ground, he would still be
a country practitioner, reading his old books by his office lamp. And
yet, he was not so fresh and energetic as he ought to be. He was tired
of business and of politics. Worse than that, he was tired of the men
with whom he had to do and of the women who, as he said, had been kind
to him. He felt as if he were still hunting for something, like old
Jasper Flight. He knew that this was an unbecoming and ungrateful state
of mind, and he reproached himself for it. But he could not help
wondering why it was that life, even when it gave so much, after all
gave so little. What was it that he had expected and missed? Why was he,
more than he was anything else, disappointed?

He fell to looking back over his life and asking himself which years of
it he would like to live over again,--just as they had been,--and they
were not many. His college years he would live again, gladly. After them
there was nothing he would care to repeat until he came to Thea
Kronborg. There had been something stirring about those years in
Moonstone, when he was a restless young man on the verge of breaking
into larger enterprises, and when she was a restless child on the verge
of growing up into something unknown. He realized now that she had
counted for a great deal more to him than he knew at the time. It was a
continuous sort of relationship. He was always on the lookout for her as
he went about the town, always vaguely expecting her as he sat in his
office at night. He had never asked himself then if it was strange that
he should find a child of twelve the most interesting and companionable
person in Moonstone. It had seemed a pleasant, natural kind of
solicitude. He explained it then by the fact that he had no children of
his own. But now, as he looked back at those years, the other interests
were faded and inanimate. The thought of them was heavy. But wherever
his life had touched Thea Kronborg's, there was still a little warmth
left, a little sparkle. Their friendship seemed to run over those
discontented years like a leafy pattern, still bright and fresh when the
other patterns had faded into the dull background. Their walks and
drives and confidences, the night they watched the rabbit in the
moonlight,--why were these things stirring to remember? Whenever he
thought of them, they were distinctly different from the other memories
of his life; always seemed humorous, gay, with a little thrill of
anticipation and mystery about them. They came nearer to being tender
secrets than any others he possessed. Nearer than anything else they
corresponded to what he had hoped to find in the world, and had not
found. It came over him now that the unexpected favors of fortune, no
matter how dazzling, do not mean very much to us. They may excite or
divert us for a time, but when we look back, the only things we cherish
are those which in some way met our original want; the desire which
formed in us in early youth, undirected, and of its own accord.




III

FOR the first four years after Thea went to Germany things went on as
usual with the Kronborg family. Mrs. Kronborg's land in Nebraska
increased in value and brought her in a good rental. The family drifted
into an easier way of living, half without realizing it, as families
will. Then Mr. Kronborg, who had never been ill, died suddenly of cancer
of the liver, and after his death Mrs. Kronborg went, as her neighbors
said, into a decline. Hearing discouraging reports of her from the
physician who had taken over his practice, Dr. Archie went up from
Denver to see her. He found her in bed, in the room where he had more
than once attended her, a handsome woman of sixty with a body still firm
and white, her hair, faded now to a very pale primrose, in two thick
braids down her back, her eyes clear and calm. When the doctor arrived,
she was sitting up in her bed, knitting. He felt at once how glad she
was to see him, but he soon gathered that she had made no determination
to get well. She told him, indeed, that she could not very well get
along without Mr. Kronborg. The doctor looked at her with astonishment.
Was it possible that she could miss the foolish old man so much? He
reminded her of her children.

“Yes,” she replied; “the children are all very well, but they are not
father. We were married young.”

The doctor watched her wonderingly as she went on knitting, thinking how
much she looked like Thea. The difference was one of degree rather than
of kind. The daughter had a compelling enthusiasm, the mother had none.
But their framework, their foundation, was very much the same.

In a moment Mrs. Kronborg spoke again. “Have you heard anything from
Thea lately?”

During his talk with her, the doctor gathered that what Mrs. Kronborg
really wanted was to see her daughter Thea. Lying there day after day,
she wanted it calmly and continuously. He told her that, since she felt
so, he thought they might ask Thea to come home.

“I've thought a good deal about it,” said Mrs. Kronborg slowly. “I hate
to interrupt her, now that she's begun to get advancement. I expect
she's seen some pretty hard times, though she was never one to complain.
Perhaps she'd feel that she would like to come. It would be hard, losing
both of us while she's off there.”

When Dr. Archie got back to Denver he wrote a long letter to Thea,
explaining her mother's condition and how much she wished to see her,
and asking Thea to come, if only for a few weeks. Thea had repaid the
money she had borrowed from him, and he assured her that if she happened
to be short of funds for the journey, she had only to cable him.

A month later he got a frantic sort of reply from Thea. Complications in
the opera at Dresden had given her an unhoped-for opportunity to go on
in a big part. Before this letter reached the doctor, she would have
made her debut as ELIZABETH, in “Tannhauser.” She wanted to go to her
mother more than she wanted anything else in the world, but, unless she
failed,--which she would not,--she absolutely could not leave Dresden
for six months. It was not that she chose to stay; she had to stay--or
lose everything. The next few months would put her five years ahead, or
would put her back so far that it would be of no use to struggle
further. As soon as she was free, she would go to Moonstone and take her
mother back to Germany with her. Her mother, she was sure, could live
for years yet, and she would like German people and German ways, and
could be hearing music all the time. Thea said she was writing her
mother and begging her to help her one last time; to get strength and to
wait for her six months, and then she (Thea) would do everything. Her
mother would never have to make an effort again.

Dr. Archie went up to Moonstone at once. He had great confidence in Mrs.
Kronborg's power of will, and if Thea's appeal took hold of her enough,
he believed she might get better. But when he was shown into the
familiar room off the parlor, his heart sank. Mrs. Kronborg was lying
serene and fateful on her pillows. On the dresser at the foot of her bed
there was a large photograph of Thea in the character in which she was
to make her debut. Mrs. Kronborg pointed to it.

“Isn't she lovely, doctor? It's nice that she hasn't changed much. I've
seen her look like that many a time.”

They talked for a while about Thea's good fortune. Mrs. Kronborg had had
a cablegram saying, “First performance well received. Great relief.” In
her letter Thea said; “If you'll only get better, dear mother, there's
nothing I can't do. I will make a really great success, if you'll try
with me. You shall have everything you want, and we will always be
together. I have a little house all picked out where we are to live.”

“Bringing up a family is not all it's cracked up to be,” said Mrs.
Kronborg with a flicker of irony, as she tucked the letter back under
her pillow. “The children you don't especially need, you have always
with you, like the poor. But the bright ones get away from you. They
have their own way to make in the world. Seems like the brighter they
are, the farther they go. I used to feel sorry that you had no family,
doctor, but maybe you're as well off.”

“Thea's plan seems sound to me, Mrs. Kronborg. There's no reason I can
see why you shouldn't pull up and live for years yet, under proper care.
You'd have the best doctors in the world over there, and it would be
wonderful to live with anybody who looks like that.” He nodded at the
photograph of the young woman who must have been singing “DICH, THEURE
HALLE, GRUSS' ICH WIEDER,” her eyes looking up, her beautiful hands
outspread with pleasure.

Mrs. Kronborg laughed quite cheerfully. “Yes, wouldn't it? If father
were here, I might rouse myself. But sometimes it's hard to come back.
Or if she were in trouble, maybe I could rouse myself.”

“But, dear Mrs. Kronborg, she is in trouble,” her old friend
expostulated. “As she says, she's never needed you as she needs you now.
I make my guess that she's never begged anybody to help her before.”

Mrs. Kronborg smiled. “Yes, it's pretty of her. But that will pass. When
these things happen far away they don't make such a mark; especially if
your hands are full and you've duties of your own to think about. My own
father died in Nebraska when Gunner was born,--we were living in Iowa
then,--and I was sorry, but the baby made it up to me. I was father's
favorite, too. That's the way it goes, you see.”

The doctor took out Thea's letter to him, and read it over to Mrs.
Kronborg. She seemed to listen, and not to listen.

When he finished, she said thoughtfully: “I'd counted on hearing her
sing again. But I always took my pleasures as they come. I always
enjoyed her singing when she was here about the house. While she was
practicing I often used to leave my work and sit down in a rocker and
give myself up to it, the same as if I'd been at an entertainment. I was
never one of these housekeepers that let their work drive them to death.
And when she had the Mexicans over here, I always took it in. First and
last,”--she glanced judicially at the photograph,--“I guess I got about
as much out of Thea's voice as anybody will ever get.”

“I guess you did!” the doctor assented heartily; “and I got a good deal
myself. You remember how she used to sing those Scotch songs for me, and
lead us with her head, her hair bobbing?”

“'Flow Gently, Sweet Afton,'--I can hear it now,” said Mrs. Kronborg;
“and poor father never knew when he sang sharp! He used to say, 'Mother,
how do you always know when they make mistakes practicing?'” Mrs.
Kronborg chuckled.

Dr. Archie took her hand, still firm like the hand of a young woman. “It
was lucky for her that you did know. I always thought she got more from
you than from any of her teachers.”

“Except Wunsch; he was a real musician,” said Mrs. Kronborg
respectfully. “I gave her what chance I could, in a crowded house. I
kept the other children out of the parlor for her. That was about all I
could do. If she wasn't disturbed, she needed no watching. She went
after it like a terrier after rats from the first, poor child. She was
downright afraid of it. That's why I always encouraged her taking Thor
off to outlandish places. When she was out of the house, then she was
rid of it.”

After they had recalled many pleasant memories together, Mrs. Kronborg
said suddenly: “I always understood about her going off without coming
to see us that time. Oh, I know! You had to keep your own counsel. You
were a good friend to her. I've never forgot that.” She patted the
doctor's sleeve and went on absently. “There was something she didn't
want to tell me, and that's why she didn't come. Something happened when
she was with those people in Mexico. I worried for a good while, but I
guess she's come out of it all right. She'd had a pretty hard time,
scratching along alone like that when she was so young, and my farms in
Nebraska were down so low that I couldn't help her none. That's no way
to send a girl out. But I guess, whatever there was, she wouldn't be
afraid to tell me now.” Mrs. Kronborg looked up at the photograph with a
smile. “She doesn't look like she was beholding to anybody, does she?”

“She isn't, Mrs. Kronborg. She never has been. That was why she borrowed
the money from me.”

“Oh, I knew she'd never have sent for you if she'd done anything to
shame us. She was always proud.” Mrs. Kronborg paused and turned a
little on her side. “It's been quite a satisfaction to you and me,
doctor, having her voice turn out so fine. The things you hope for don't
always turn out like that, by a long sight. As long as old Mrs. Kohler
lived, she used always to translate what it said about Thea in the
German papers she sent. I could make some of it out myself,--it's not
very different from Swedish,--but it pleased the old lady. She left Thea
her piece-picture of the burning of Moscow. I've got it put away in
moth-balls for her, along with the oboe her grandfather brought from
Sweden. I want her to take father's oboe back there some day.” Mrs.
Kronborg paused a moment and compressed her lips. “But I guess she'll
take a finer instrument than that with her, back to Sweden!” she added.

Her tone fairly startled the doctor, it was so vibrating with a fierce,
defiant kind of pride he had heard often in Thea's voice. He looked down
wonderingly at his old friend and patient. After all, one never knew
people to the core. Did she, within her, hide some of that still passion
of which her daughter was all-compact?

“That last summer at home wasn't very nice for her,” Mrs. Kronborg began
as placidly as if the fire had never leaped up in her. “The other
children were acting-up because they thought I might make a fuss over
her and give her the big-head. We gave her the dare, somehow, the lot of
us, because we couldn't understand her changing teachers and all that.
That's the trouble about giving the dare to them quiet, unboastful
children; you never know how far it'll take 'em. Well, we ought not to
complain, doctor; she's given us a good deal to think about.”


The next time Dr. Archie came to Moonstone, he came to be a pall-bearer
at Mrs. Kronborg's funeral. When he last looked at her, she was so
serene and queenly that he went back to Denver feeling almost as if he
had helped to bury Thea Kronborg herself. The handsome head in the
coffin seemed to him much more really Thea than did the radiant young
woman in the picture, looking about at the Gothic vaultings and greeting
the Hall of Song.




IV

ONE bright morning late in February Dr. Archie was breakfasting
comfortably at the Waldorf. He had got into Jersey City on an early
train, and a red, windy sunrise over the North River had given him a
good appetite. He consulted the morning paper while he drank his coffee
and saw that “Lohengrin” was to be sung at the opera that evening. In
the list of the artists who would appear was the name “Kronborg.” Such
abruptness rather startled him. “Kronborg”: it was impressive and yet,
somehow, disrespectful; somewhat rude and brazen, on the back page of
the morning paper. After breakfast he went to the hotel ticket office
and asked the girl if she could give him something for “Lohengrin,”
 “near the front.” His manner was a trifle awkward and he wondered
whether the girl noticed it. Even if she did, of course, she could
scarcely suspect. Before the ticket stand he saw a bunch of blue posters
announcing the opera casts for the week. There was “Lohengrin,” and
under it he saw:--


ELSA VON BRABANT...Thea Kronborg.


That looked better. The girl gave him a ticket for a seat which she said
was excellent. He paid for it and went out to the cabstand. He mentioned
to the driver a number on Riverside Drive and got into a taxi. It would
not, of course, be the right thing to call upon Thea when she was going
to sing in the evening. He knew that much, thank goodness! Fred
Ottenburg had hinted to him that, more than almost anything else, that
would put one in wrong.

When he reached the number to which he directed his letters, he
dismissed the cab and got out for a walk. The house in which Thea lived
was as impersonal as the Waldorf, and quite as large. It was above 116th
Street, where the Drive narrows, and in front of it the shelving bank
dropped to the North River. As Archie strolled about the paths which
traversed this slope, below the street level, the fourteen stories of
the apartment hotel rose above him like a perpendicular cliff. He had no
idea on which floor Thea lived, but he reflected, as his eye ran over
the many windows, that the outlook would be fine from any floor. The
forbidding hugeness of the house made him feel as if he had expected to
meet Thea in a crowd and had missed her. He did not really believe that
she was hidden away behind any of those glittering windows, or that he
was to hear her this evening. His walk was curiously uninspiring and
unsuggestive. Presently remembering that Ottenburg had encouraged him to
study his lesson, he went down to the opera house and bought a libretto.
He had even brought his old “Adler's German and English” in his trunk,
and after luncheon he settled down in his gilded suite at the Waldorf
with a big cigar and the text of “Lohengrin.”

The opera was announced for seven-forty-five, but at half-past seven
Archie took his seat in the right front of the orchestra circle. He had
never been inside the Metropolitan Opera House before, and the height of
the audience room, the rich color, and the sweep of the balconies were
not without their effect upon him. He watched the house fill with a
growing feeling of expectation. When the steel curtain rose and the men
of the orchestra took their places, he felt distinctly nervous. The
burst of applause which greeted the conductor keyed him still higher. He
found that he had taken off his gloves and twisted them to a string.
When the lights went down and the violins began the overture, the place
looked larger than ever; a great pit, shadowy and solemn. The whole
atmosphere, he reflected, was somehow more serious than he had
anticipated.

After the curtains were drawn back upon the scene beside the Scheldt, he
got readily into the swing of the story. He was so much interested in
the bass who sang KING HENRY that he had almost forgotten for what he
was waiting so nervously, when the HERALD began in stentorian tones to
summon ELSA VON BRABANT. Then he began to realize that he was rather
frightened. There was a flutter of white at the back of the stage, and
women began to come in: two, four, six, eight, but not the right one. It
flashed across him that this was something like buck-fever, the
paralyzing moment that comes upon a man when his first elk looks at him
through the bushes, under its great antlers; the moment when a man's
mind is so full of shooting that he forgets the gun in his hand until
the buck nods adieu to him from a distant hill.

All at once, before the buck had left him, she was there. Yes,
unquestionably it was she. Her eyes were downcast, but the head, the
cheeks, the chin--there could be no mistake; she advanced slowly, as if
she were walking in her sleep. Some one spoke to her; she only inclined
her head. He spoke again, and she bowed her head still lower. Archie had
forgotten his libretto, and he had not counted upon these long pauses.
He had expected her to appear and sing and reassure him. They seemed to
be waiting for her. Did she ever forget? Why in thunder didn't she--She
made a sound, a faint one. The people on the stage whispered together
and seemed confounded. His nervousness was absurd. She must have done
this often before; she knew her bearings. She made another sound, but he
could make nothing of it. Then the King sang to her, and Archie began to
remember where they were in the story. She came to the front of the
stage, lifted her eyes for the first time, clasped her hands and began,
“EINSAM IN TRUBEN TAGEN.”

Yes, it was exactly like buck-fever. Her face was there, toward the
house now, before his eyes, and he positively could not see it. She was
singing, at last, and he positively could not hear her. He was conscious
of nothing but an uncomfortable dread and a sense of crushing
disappointment. He had, after all, missed her. Whatever was there, she
was not there--for him.

The King interrupted her. She began again, “IN LICHTER WAFFEN SCHEINE.”
 Archie did not know when his buckfever passed, but presently he found
that he was sitting quietly in a darkened house, not listening to but
dreaming upon a river of silver sound. He felt apart from the others,
drifting alone on the melody, as if he had been alone with it for a long
while and had known it all before. His power of attention was not great
just then, but in so far as it went he seemed to be looking through an
exalted calmness at a beautiful woman from far away, from another sort
of life and feeling and understanding than his own, who had in her face
something he had known long ago, much brightened and beautified. As a
lad he used to believe that the faces of people who died were like that
in the next world; the same faces, but shining with the light of a new
understanding. No, Ottenburg had not prepared him!

What he felt was admiration and estrangement. The homely reunion, that
he had somehow expected, now seemed foolish. Instead of feeling proud
that he knew her better than all these people about him, he felt
chagrined at his own ingenuousness. For he did not know her better. This
woman he had never known; she had somehow devoured his little friend, as
the wolf ate up Red Ridinghood. Beautiful, radiant, tender as she was,
she chilled his old affection; that sort of feeling was not appropriate.
She seemed much, much farther away from him than she had seemed all
those years when she was in Germany. The ocean he could cross, but there
was something here he could not cross. There was a moment, when she
turned to the King and smiled that rare, sunrise smile of her childhood,
when he thought she was coming back to him. After the HERALD'S second
call for her champion, when she knelt in her impassioned prayer, there
was again something familiar, a kind of wild wonder that she had had the
power to call up long ago. But she merely reminded him of Thea; this was
not the girl herself.

After the tenor came on, the doctor ceased trying to make the woman
before him fit into any of his cherished recollections. He took her, in
so far as he could, for what she was then and there. When the knight
raised the kneeling girl and put his mailed hand on her hair, when she
lifted to him a face full of worship and passionate humility, Archie
gave up his last reservation. He knew no more about her than did the
hundreds around him, who sat in the shadow and looked on, as he looked,
some with more understanding, some with less. He knew as much about
ORTRUDE or LOHENGRIN as he knew about ELSA--more, because she went
further than they, she sustained the legendary beauty of her conception
more consistently. Even he could see that. Attitudes, movements, her
face, her white arms and fingers, everything was suffused with a rosy
tenderness, a warm humility, a gracious and yet--to him--wholly
estranging beauty.

During the balcony singing in the second act the doctor's thoughts were
as far away from Moonstone as the singer's doubtless were. He had begun,
indeed, to feel the exhilaration of getting free from personalities, of
being released from his own past as well as from Thea Kronborg's. It was
very much, he told himself, like a military funeral, exalting and
impersonal. Something old died in one, and out of it something new was
born. During the duet with ORTRUDE, and the splendors of the wedding
processional, this new feeling grew and grew. At the end of the act
there were many curtain calls and ELSA acknowledged them, brilliant,
gracious, spirited, with her far-breaking smile; but on the whole she
was harder and more self-contained before the curtain than she was in
the scene behind it. Archie did his part in the applause that greeted
her, but it was the new and wonderful he applauded, not the old and
dear. His personal, proprietary pride in her was frozen out.

He walked about the house during the ENTR'ACTE, and here and there among
the people in the foyer he caught the name “Kronborg.” On the staircase,
in front of the coffeeroom, a long-haired youth with a fat face was
discoursing to a group of old women about “die Kronborg.” Dr. Archie
gathered that he had crossed on the boat with her.

After the performance was over, Archie took a taxi and started for
Riverside Drive. He meant to see it through to-night. When he entered
the reception hall of the hotel before which he had strolled that
morning, the hall porter challenged him. He said he was waiting for Miss
Kronborg. The porter looked at him suspiciously and asked whether he had
an appointment. He answered brazenly that he had. He was not used to
being questioned by hall boys. Archie sat first in one tapestry chair
and then in another, keeping a sharp eye on the people who came in and
went up in the elevators. He walked about and looked at his watch. An
hour dragged by. No one had come in from the street now for about twenty
minutes, when two women entered, carrying a great many flowers and
followed by a tall young man in chauffeur's uniform. Archie advanced
toward the taller of the two women, who was veiled and carried her head
very firmly. He confronted her just as she reached the elevator.
Although he did not stand directly in her way, something in his attitude
compelled her to stop. She gave him a piercing, defiant glance through
the white scarf that covered her face. Then she lifted her hand and
brushed the scarf back from her head. There was still black on her brows
and lashes. She was very pale and her face was drawn and deeply lined.
She looked, the doctor told himself with a sinking heart, forty years
old. Her suspicious, mystified stare cleared slowly.

“Pardon me,” the doctor murmured, not knowing just how to address her
here before the porters, “I came up from the opera. I merely wanted to
say good-night to you.”

Without speaking, still looking incredulous, she pushed him into the
elevator. She kept her hand on his arm while the cage shot up, and she
looked away from him, frowning, as if she were trying to remember or
realize something. When the cage stopped, she pushed him out of the
elevator through another door, which a maid opened, into a square hall.
There she sank down on a chair and looked up at him.

“Why didn't you let me know?” she asked in a hoarse voice.

Archie heard himself laughing the old, embarrassed laugh that seldom
happened to him now. “Oh, I wanted to take my chance with you, like
anybody else. It's been so long, now!”

She took his hand through her thick glove and her head dropped forward.
“Yes, it has been long,” she said in the same husky voice, “and so much
has happened.”

“And you are so tired, and I am a clumsy old fellow to break in on you
to-night,” the doctor added sympathetically. “Forgive me, this time.” He
bent over and put his hand soothingly on her shoulder. He felt a strong
shudder run through her from head to foot.

Still bundled in her fur coat as she was, she threw both arms about him
and hugged him. “Oh, Dr. Archie, DR. ARCHIE,”--she shook him,--“don't
let me go. Hold on, now you're here,” she laughed, breaking away from
him at the same moment and sliding out of her fur coat. She left it for
the maid to pick up and pushed the doctor into the sitting-room, where
she turned on the lights. “Let me LOOK at you. Yes; hands, feet, head,
shoulders--just the same. You've grown no older. You can't say as much
for me, can you?”

She was standing in the middle of the room, in a white silk shirtwaist
and a short black velvet skirt, which somehow suggested that they had
'cut off her petticoats all round about.' She looked distinctly clipped
and plucked. Her hair was parted in the middle and done very close to
her head, as she had worn it under the wig. She looked like a fugitive,
who had escaped from something in clothes caught up at hazard. It
flashed across Dr. Archie that she was running away from the other woman
down at the opera house, who had used her hardly.

He took a step toward her. “I can't tell a thing in the world about you,
Thea--if I may still call you that.”

She took hold of the collar of his overcoat. “Yes, call me that. Do: I
like to hear it. You frighten me a little, but I expect I frighten you
more. I'm always a scarecrow after I sing a long part like that--so
high, too.” She absently pulled out the handkerchief that protruded from
his breast pocket and began to wipe the black paint off her eyebrows and
lashes. “I can't take you in much to-night, but I must see you for a
little while.” She pushed him to a chair. “I shall be more recognizable
to-morrow. You mustn't think of me as you see me to-night. Come at four
to-morrow afternoon and have tea with me. Can you? That's good.”

She sat down in a low chair beside him and leaned forward, drawing her
shoulders together. She seemed to him inappropriately young and
inappropriately old, shorn of her long tresses at one end and of her
long robes at the other.

“How do you happen to be here?” she asked abruptly. “How can you leave a
silver mine? I couldn't! Sure nobody'll cheat you? But you can explain
everything tomorrow.” She paused. “You remember how you sewed me up in a
poultice, once? I wish you could to-night. I need a poultice, from top
to toe. Something very disagreeable happened down there. You said you
were out front? Oh, don't say anything about it. I always know exactly
how it goes, unfortunately. I was rotten in the balcony. I never get
that. You didn't notice it? Probably not, but I did.”

Here the maid appeared at the door and her mistress rose. “My supper?
Very well, I'll come. I'd ask you to stay, doctor, but there wouldn't be
enough for two. They seldom send up enough for one,”--she spoke
bitterly. “I haven't got a sense of you yet,”--turning directly to
Archie again. “You haven't been here. You've only announced yourself,
and told me you are coming to-morrow. You haven't seen me, either. This
is not I. But I'll be here waiting for you to-morrow, my whole works!
Goodnight, till then.” She patted him absently on the sleeve and gave
him a little shove toward the door.




V

WHEN Archie got back to his hotel at two o'clock in the morning, he
found Fred Ottenburg's card under his door, with a message scribbled
across the top: “When you come in, please call up room 811, this hotel.”
 A moment later Fred's voice reached him over the telephone.

“That you, Archie? Won't you come up? I'm having some supper and I'd
like company. Late? What does that matter? I won't keep you long.”

Archie dropped his overcoat and set out for room 811. He found Ottenburg
in the act of touching a match to a chafing-dish, at a table laid for
two in his sitting-room. “I'm catering here,” he announced cheerfully.
“I let the waiter off at midnight, after he'd set me up. You'll have to
account for yourself, Archie.”

The doctor laughed, pointing to three wine-coolers under the table. “Are
you expecting guests?”

“Yes, two.” Ottenburg held up two fingers,--“you, and my higher self.
He's a thirsty boy, and I don't invite him often. He has been known to
give me a headache. Now, where have you been, Archie, until this
shocking hour?”

“Bah, you've been banting!” the doctor exclaimed, pulling out his white
gloves as he searched for his handkerchief and throwing them into a
chair. Ottenburg was in evening clothes and very pointed dress shoes.
His white waistcoat, upon which the doctor had fixed a challenging eye,
went down straight from the top button, and he wore a camelia. He was
conspicuously brushed and trimmed and polished. His smoothly controlled
excitement was wholly different from his usual easy cordiality, though
he had his face, as well as his figure, well in hand. On the
serving-table there was an empty champagne pint and a glass. He had been
having a little starter, the doctor told himself, and would probably be
running on high gear before he got through. There was even now an air of
speed about him.

“Been, Freddy?”--the doctor at last took up his question. “I expect I've
been exactly where you have. Why didn't you tell me you were coming on?”

“I wasn't, Archie.” Fred lifted the cover of the chafingdish and stirred
the contents. He stood behind the table, holding the lid with his
handkerchief. “I had never thought of such a thing. But Landry, a young
chap who plays her accompaniments and who keeps an eye out for me,
telegraphed me that Madame Rheinecker had gone to Atlantic City with a
bad throat, and Thea might have a chance to sing ELSA. She has sung it
only twice here before, and I missed it in Dresden. So I came on. I got
in at four this afternoon and saw you registered, but I thought I wouldn't
butt in. How lucky you got here just when she was coming on for
this. You couldn't have hit a better time.” Ottenburg stirred the
contents of the dish faster and put in more sherry. “And where have you
been since twelve o'clock, may I ask?”

Archie looked rather self-conscious, as he sat down on a fragile gilt
chair that rocked under him, and stretched out his long legs. “Well, if
you'll believe me, I had the brutality to go to see her. I wanted to
identify her. Couldn't wait.”

Ottenburg placed the cover quickly on the chafing-dish and took a step
backward. “You did, old sport? My word! None but the brave deserve the
fair. Well,”--he stooped to turn the wine,--“and how was she?”

“She seemed rather dazed, and pretty well used up. She seemed
disappointed in herself, and said she hadn't done herself justice in the
balcony scene.”

“Well, if she didn't, she's not the first. Beastly stuff to sing right
in there; lies just on the 'break' in the voice.” Fred pulled a bottle
out of the ice and drew the cork. Lifting his glass he looked meaningly
at Archie. “You know who, doctor. Here goes!” He drank off his glass
with a sigh of satisfaction. After he had turned the lamp low under the
chafing-dish, he remained standing, looking pensively down at the food
on the table. “Well, she rather pulled it off! As a backer, you're a
winner, Archie. I congratulate you.” Fred poured himself another glass.
“Now you must eat something, and so must I. Here, get off that bird cage
and find a steady chair. This stuff ought to be rather good; head
waiter's suggestion. Smells all right.” He bent over the chafing-dish
and began to serve the contents. “Perfectly innocuous: mushrooms and
truffles and a little crab-meat. And now, on the level, Archie, how did
it hit you?”

Archie turned a frank smile to his friend and shook his head. “It was
all miles beyond me, of course, but it gave me a pulse. The general
excitement got hold of me, I suppose. I like your wine, Freddy.” He put
down his glass. “It goes to the spot to-night. She WAS all right, then?
You weren't disappointed?”

“Disappointed? My dear Archie, that's the high voice we dream of; so
pure and yet so virile and human. That combination hardly ever happens
with sopranos.” Ottenburg sat down and turned to the doctor, speaking
calmly and trying to dispel his friend's manifest bewilderment. “You
see, Archie, there's the voice itself, so beautiful and individual, and
then there's something else; the thing in it which responds to every
shade of thought and feeling, spontaneously, almost unconsciously. That
color has to be born in a singer, it can't be acquired; lots of
beautiful voices haven't a vestige of it. It's almost like another
gift--the rarest of all. The voice simply is the mind and is the heart.
It can't go wrong in interpretation, because it has in it the thing that
makes all interpretation. That's why you feel so sure of her. After
you've listened to her for an hour or so, you aren't afraid of anything.
All the little dreads you have with other artists vanish. You lean back
and you say to yourself, 'No, THAT voice will never betray.' TREULICH
GEFUHRT, TREULICH BEWACHT.”

Archie looked envyingly at Fred's excited, triumphant face. How
satisfactory it must be, he thought, to really know what she was doing
and not to have to take it on hearsay. He took up his glass with a sigh.
“I seem to need a good deal of cooling off to-night. I'd just as lief
forget the Reform Party for once.

“Yes, Fred,” he went on seriously; “I thought it sounded very beautiful,
and I thought she was very beautiful, too. I never imagined she could be
as beautiful as that.”

“Wasn't she? Every attitude a picture, and always the right kind of
picture, full of that legendary, supernatural thing she gets into it. I
never heard the prayer sung like that before. That look that came in her
eyes; it went right out through the back of the roof. Of course, you get
an ELSA who can look through walls like that, and visions and
Grail-knights happen naturally. She becomes an abbess, that girl, after
LOHENGRIN leaves her. She's made to live with ideas and enthusiasms, not
with a husband.” Fred folded his arms, leaned back in his chair, and
began to sing softly:--


“Ein Ritter nahte da.”


“Doesn't she die, then, at the end?” the doctor asked guardedly.

Fred smiled, reaching under the table. “Some ELSAS do; she didn't. She
left me with the distinct impression that she was just beginning. Now,
doctor, here's a cold one.” He twirled a napkin smoothly about the green
glass, the cork gave and slipped out with a soft explosion. “And now we
must have another toast. It's up to you, this time.”

The doctor watched the agitation in his glass. “The same,” he said
without lifting his eyes. “That's good enough. I can't raise you.”

Fred leaned forward, and looked sharply into his face. “That's the
point; how COULD you raise me? Once again!”

“Once again, and always the same!” The doctor put down his glass. “This
doesn't seem to produce any symptoms in me to-night.” He lit a cigar.
“Seriously, Freddy, I wish I knew more about what she's driving at. It
makes me jealous, when you are so in it and I'm not.”

“In it?” Fred started up. “My God, haven't you seen her this blessed
night?--when she'd have kicked any other man down the elevator shaft, if
I know her. Leave me something; at least what I can pay my five bucks
for.”

“Seems to me you get a good deal for your five bucks,” said Archie
ruefully. “And that, after all, is what she cares about,--what people
get.”

Fred lit a cigarette, took a puff or two, and then threw it away. He was
lounging back in his chair, and his face was pale and drawn hard by that
mood of intense concentration which lurks under the sunny shallows of
the vineyard. In his voice there was a longer perspective than usual, a
slight remoteness. “You see, Archie, it's all very simple, a natural
development. It's exactly what Mahler said back there in the beginning,
when she sang WOGLINDE. It's the idea, the basic idea, pulsing behind
every bar she sings. She simplifies a character down to the musical idea
it's built on, and makes everything conform to that. The people who
chatter about her being a great actress don't seem to get the notion of
where SHE gets the notion. It all goes back to her original endowment,
her tremendous musical talent. Instead of inventing a lot of business
and expedients to suggest character, she knows the thing at the root,
and lets the musical pattern take care of her. The score pours her into
all those lovely postures, makes the light and shadow go over her face,
lifts her and drops her. She lies on it, the way she used to lie on the
Rhine music. Talk about rhythm!”

The doctor frowned dubiously as a third bottle made its appearance above
the cloth. “Aren't you going in rather strong?”

Fred laughed. “No, I'm becoming too sober. You see this is breakfast
now; kind of wedding breakfast. I feel rather weddingish. I don't mind.
You know,” he went on as the wine gurgled out, “I was thinking to-night
when they sprung the wedding music, how any fool can have that stuff
played over him when he walks up the aisle with some dough-faced little
hussy who's hooked him. But it isn't every fellow who can see--well,
what we saw tonight. There are compensations in life, Dr. Howard Archie,
though they come in disguise. Did you notice her when she came down the
stairs? Wonder where she gets that bright-and-morning star look? Carries
to the last row of the family circle. I moved about all over the house.
I'll tell you a secret, Archie: that carrying power was one of the first
things that put me wise. Noticed it down there in Arizona, in the open.
That, I said, belongs only to the big ones.” Fred got up and began to
move rhythmically about the room, his hands in his pockets. The doctor
was astonished at his ease and steadiness, for there were slight lapses
in his speech. “You see, Archie, ELSA isn't a part that's particularly
suited to Thea's voice at all, as I see her voice. It's over-lyrical for
her. She makes it, but there's nothing in it that fits her like a glove,
except, maybe, that long duet in the third act. There, of course,”--he
held out his hands as if he were measuring something,--“we know exactly
where we are. But wait until they give her a chance at something that
lies properly in her voice, and you'll see me rosier than I am
to-night.”

Archie smoothed the tablecloth with his hand. “I am sure I don't want to
see you any rosier, Fred.”

Ottenburg threw back his head and laughed. “It's enthusiasm, doctor.
It's not the wine. I've got as much inflated as this for a dozen trashy
things: brewers' dinners and political orgies. You, too, have your
extravagances, Archie. And what I like best in you is this particular
enthusiasm, which is not at all practical or sensible, which is
downright Quixotic. You are not altogether what you seem, and you have
your reservations. Living among the wolves, you have not become one.
LUPIBUS VIVENDI NON LUPUS SUM.”

The doctor seemed embarrassed. “I was just thinking how tired she
looked, plucked of all her fine feathers, while we get all the fun.
Instead of sitting here carousing, we ought to go solemnly to bed.”

“I get your idea.” Ottenburg crossed to the window and threw it open.
“Fine night outside; a hag of a moon just setting. It begins to smell
like morning. After all, Archie, think of the lonely and rather solemn
hours we've spent waiting for all this, while she's been--reveling.”

Archie lifted his brows. “I somehow didn't get the idea to-night that
she revels much.”

“I don't mean this sort of thing.” Fred turned toward the light and
stood with his back to the window. “That,” with a nod toward the
wine-cooler, “is only a cheap imitation, that any poor stiff-fingered
fool can buy and feel his shell grow thinner. But take it from me, no
matter what she pays, or how much she may see fit to lie about it, the
real, the master revel is hers.” He leaned back against the window sill
and crossed his arms. “Anybody with all that voice and all that talent
and all that beauty, has her hour. Her hour,” he went on deliberately,
“when she can say, 'there it is, at last, WIE IM TRAUM ICH. As in my
dream I dreamed it, as in my will it was.'”


He stood silent a moment, twisting the flower from his coat by the stem
and staring at the blank wall with haggard abstraction. “Even I can
say to-night, Archie,” he brought out slowly, “'As in my dream I dreamed
it, as in my will it was.' Now, doctor, you may leave me. I'm beautifully
drunk, but not with anything that ever grew in France.”

The doctor rose. Fred tossed his flower out of the window behind him and
came toward the door. “I say,” he called, “have you a date with
anybody?”

The doctor paused, his hand on the knob. “With Thea, you mean? Yes. I'm
to go to her at four this afternoon--if you haven't paralyzed me.”

“Well, you won't eat me, will you, if I break in and send up my card?
She'll probably turn me down cold, but that won't hurt my feelings. If
she ducks me, you tell her for me, that to spite me now she'd have to
cut off more than she can spare. Good-night, Archie.”




VI

IT was late on the morning after the night she sang ELSA, when Thea
Kronborg stirred uneasily in her bed. The room was darkened by two sets
of window shades, and the day outside was thick and cloudy. She turned
and tried to recapture unconsciousness, knowing that she would not be
able to do so. She dreaded waking stale and disappointed after a great
effort. The first thing that came was always the sense of the futility
of such endeavor, and of the absurdity of trying too hard. Up to a
certain point, say eighty degrees, artistic endeavor could be fat and
comfortable, methodical and prudent. But if you went further than that,
if you drew yourself up toward ninety degrees, you parted with your
defenses and left yourself exposed to mischance. The legend was that in
those upper reaches you might be divine; but you were much likelier to
be ridiculous. Your public wanted just about eighty degrees; if you gave
it more it blew its nose and put a crimp in you. In the morning,
especially, it seemed to her very probable that whatever struggled above
the good average was not quite sound. Certainly very little of that
superfluous ardor, which cost so dear, ever got across the footlights.
These misgivings waited to pounce upon her when she wakened. They
hovered about her bed like vultures.

She reached under her pillow for her handkerchief, without opening her
eyes. She had a shadowy memory that there was to be something unusual,
that this day held more disquieting possibilities than days commonly
held. There was something she dreaded; what was it? Oh, yes, Dr. Archie
was to come at four.

A reality like Dr. Archie, poking up out of the past, reminded one
of disappointments and losses, of a freedom that was no more:
reminded her of blue, golden mornings long ago, when she used to waken
with a burst of joy at recovering her precious self and her precious
world; when she never lay on her pillows at eleven o'clock like
something the waves had washed up. After all, why had he come? It had
been so long, and so much had happened. The things she had lost, he
would miss readily enough. What she had gained, he would scarcely
perceive. He, and all that he recalled, lived for her as memories. In
sleep, and in hours of illness or exhaustion, she went back to them and
held them to her heart. But they were better as memories. They had
nothing to do with the struggle that made up her actual life. She felt
drearily that she was not flexible enough to be the person her old
friend expected her to be, the person she herself wished to be with him.

Thea reached for the bell and rang twice,--a signal to her maid to order
her breakfast. She rose and ran up the window shades and turned on the
water in her bathroom, glancing into the mirror apprehensively as she
passed it. Her bath usually cheered her, even on low mornings like this.
Her white bathroom, almost as large as her sleeping-room, she regarded as
a refuge. When she turned the key behind her, she left care and vexation
on the other side of the door. Neither her maid nor the management nor
her letters nor her accompanist could get at her now.

When she pinned her braids about her head, dropped her nightgown and
stepped out to begin her Swedish movements, she was a natural creature
again, and it was so that she liked herself best. She slid into the tub
with anticipation and splashed and tumbled about a good deal. Whatever
else she hurried, she never hurried her bath. She used her brushes and
sponges and soaps like toys, fairly playing in the water. Her own body
was always a cheering sight to her. When she was careworn, when her mind
felt old and tired, the freshness of her physical self, her long, firm
lines, the smoothness of her skin, reassured her. This morning, because
of awakened memories, she looked at herself more carefully than usual,
and was not discouraged. While she was in the tub she began to whistle
softly the tenor aria, “AH! FUYEZ, DOUCE IMAGE,” somehow appropriate to
the bath. After a noisy moment under the cold shower, she stepped out on
the rug flushed and glowing, threw her arms above her head, and rose on
her toes, keeping the elevation as long as she could. When she dropped
back on her heels and began to rub herself with the towels, she took up
the aria again, and felt quite in the humor for seeing Dr. Archie. After
she had returned to her bed, the maid brought her letters and the
morning papers with her breakfast.

“Telephone Mr. Landry and ask him if he can come at half-past three,
Theresa, and order tea to be brought up at five.”


When Howard Archie was admitted to Thea's apartment that afternoon, he
was shown into the music-room back of the little reception room. Thea
was sitting in a davenport behind the piano, talking to a young man whom
she later introduced as her friend Mr. Landry. As she rose, and came to
meet him, Archie felt a deep relief, a sudden thankfulness. She no
longer looked clipped and plucked, or dazed and fleeing.

Dr. Archie neglected to take account of the young man to whom he was
presented. He kept Thea's hands and held her where he met her, taking in
the light, lively sweep of her hair, her clear green eyes and her throat
that came up strong and dazzlingly white from her green velvet gown. The
chin was as lovely as ever, the cheeks as smooth. All the lines of last
night had disappeared. Only at the outer corners of her eyes, between
the eye and the temple, were the faintest indications of a future
attack--mere kitten scratches that playfully hinted where one day the
cat would claw her. He studied her without any embarrassment. Last night
everything had been awkward; but now, as he held her hands, a kind of
harmony came between them, a reestablishment of confidence.

“After all, Thea,--in spite of all, I still know you,” he murmured.

She took his arm and led him up to the young man who was standing beside
the piano. “Mr. Landry knows all about you, Dr. Archie. He has known
about you for many years.” While the two men shook hands she stood
between them, drawing them together by her presence and her glances.
“When I first went to Germany, Landry was studying there. He used to be
good enough to work with me when I could not afford to have an
accompanist for more than two hours a day. We got into the way of
working together. He is a singer, too, and has his own career to look
after, but he still manages to give me some time. I want you to be
friends.” She smiled from one to the other.

The rooms, Archie noticed, full of last night's flowers, were furnished
in light colors, the hotel bleakness of them a little softened by a
magnificent Steinway piano, white bookshelves full of books and scores,
some drawings of ballet dancers, and the very deep sofa behind the
piano.

“Of course,” Archie asked apologetically, “you have seen the papers?”

“Very cordial, aren't they? They evidently did not expect as much as I
did. ELSA is not really in my voice. I can sing the music, but I have to
go after it.”

“That is exactly,” the doctor came out boldly, “what Fred Ottenburg said
this morning.”

They had remained standing, the three of them, by the piano, where the
gray afternoon light was strongest. Thea turned to the doctor with
interest. “Is Fred in town? They were from him, then--some flowers that
came last night without a card.” She indicated the white lilacs on the
window sill. “Yes, he would know, certainly,” she said thoughtfully.
“Why don't we sit down? There will be some tea for you in a minute,
Landry. He's very dependent upon it,” disapprovingly to Archie. “Now
tell me, Doctor, did you really have a good time last night, or were you
uncomfortable? Did you feel as if I were trying to hold my hat on by my
eyebrows?”

He smiled. “I had all kinds of a time. But I had no feeling of that
sort. I couldn't be quite sure that it was you at all. That was why I
came up here last night. I felt as if I'd lost you.”

She leaned toward him and brushed his sleeve reassuringly. “Then I
didn't give you an impression of painful struggle? Landry was singing at
Weber and Fields' last night. He didn't get in until the performance was
half over. But I see the TRIBUNE man felt that I was working pretty
hard. Did you see that notice, Oliver?”

Dr. Archie looked closely at the red-headed young man for the first
time, and met his lively brown eyes, full of a droll, confiding sort of
humor. Mr. Landry was not prepossessing. He was undersized and clumsily
made, with a red, shiny face and a sharp little nose that looked as if
it had been whittled out of wood and was always in the air, on the scent
of something. Yet it was this queer little beak, with his eyes, that
made his countenance anything of a face at all. From a distance he
looked like the groceryman's delivery boy in a small town. His dress
seemed an acknowledgment of his grotesqueness: a short coat, like a
little boys' roundabout, and a vest fantastically sprigged and dotted,
over a lavender shirt.

At the sound of a muffled buzz, Mr. Landry sprang up.

“May I answer the telephone for you?” He went to the writing-table and
took up the receiver. “Mr. Ottenburg is downstairs,” he said, turning to
Thea and holding the mouthpiece against his coat.

“Tell him to come up,” she replied without hesitation. “How long are you
going to be in town, Dr. Archie?”

“Oh, several weeks, if you'll let me stay. I won't hang around and be a
burden to you, but I want to try to get educated up to you, though I
expect it's late to begin.”

Thea rose and touched him lightly on the shoulder. “Well, you'll never
be any younger, will you?”

“I'm not so sure about that,” the doctor replied gallantly.

The maid appeared at the door and announced Mr. Frederick Ottenburg.
Fred came in, very much got up, the doctor reflected, as he watched him
bending over Thea's hand. He was still pale and looked somewhat
chastened, and the lock of hair that hung down over his forehead was
distinctly moist. But his black afternoon coat, his gray tie and gaiters
were of a correctness that Dr. Archie could never attain for all the
efforts of his faithful slave, Van Deusen, the Denver haberdasher. To be
properly up to those tricks, the doctor supposed, you had to learn them
young. If he were to buy a silk hat that was the twin of Ottenburg's, it
would be shaggy in a week, and he could never carry it as Fred held his.

Ottenburg had greeted Thea in German, and as she replied in the same
language, Archie joined Mr. Landry at the window. “You know Mr.
Ottenburg, he tells me?”

Mr. Landry's eyes twinkled. “Yes, I regularly follow him about, when
he's in town. I would, even if he didn't send me such wonderful
Christmas presents: Russian vodka by the half-dozen!”

Thea called to them, “Come, Mr. Ottenburg is calling on all of us.
Here's the tea.”

The maid opened the door and two waiters from downstairs appeared with
covered trays. The tea-table was in the parlor. Thea drew Ottenburg with
her and went to inspect it. “Where's the rum? Oh, yes, in that thing!
Everything seems to be here, but send up some currant preserves and
cream cheese for Mr. Ottenburg. And in about fifteen minutes, bring some
fresh toast. That's all, thank you.”

For the next few minutes there was a clatter of teacups and responses
about sugar. “Landry always takes rum. I'm glad the rest of you don't.
I'm sure it's bad.” Thea poured the tea standing and got through with it
as quickly as possible, as if it were a refreshment snatched between
trains. The tea-table and the little room in which it stood seemed to be
out of scale with her long step, her long reach, and the energy of her
movements. Dr. Archie, standing near her, was pleasantly aware of the
animation of her figure. Under the clinging velvet, her body seemed
independent and unsubdued.

They drifted, with their plates and cups, back to the music-room. When
Thea followed them, Ottenburg put down his tea suddenly. “Aren't you
taking anything? Please let me.” He started back to the table.

“No, thank you, nothing. I'm going to run over that aria for you
presently, to convince you that I can do it. How did the duet go, with
Schlag?”

She was standing in the doorway and Fred came up to her: “That you'll
never do any better. You've worked your voice into it perfectly. Every
NUANCE--wonderful!”

“Think so?” She gave him a sidelong glance and spoke with a certain
gruff shyness which did not deceive anybody, and was not meant to
deceive. The tone was equivalent to “Keep it up. I like it, but I'm
awkward with it.”

Fred held her by the door and did keep it up, furiously, for full five
minutes. She took it with some confusion, seeming all the while to be
hesitating, to be arrested in her course and trying to pass him. But she
did not really try to pass, and her color deepened. Fred spoke in
German, and Archie caught from her an occasional JA? SO? muttered rather
than spoken.

When they rejoined Landry and Dr. Archie, Fred took up his tea again. “I
see you're singing VENUS Saturday night. Will they never let you have a
chance at ELIZABETH?”

She shrugged her shoulders. “Not here. There are so many singers here,
and they try us out in such a stingy way. Think of it, last year I came
over in October, and it was the first of December before I went on at
all! I'm often sorry I left Dresden.”

“Still,” Fred argued, “Dresden is limited.”

“Just so, and I've begun to sigh for those very limitations. In New York
everything is impersonal. Your audience never knows its own mind, and
its mind is never twice the same. I'd rather sing where the people are
pig-headed and throw carrots at you if you don't do it the way they like
it. The house here is splendid, and the night audiences are exciting. I
hate the matinees; like singing at a KAFFEKLATSCH.” She rose and turned
on the lights.

“Ah!” Fred exclaimed, “why do you do that? That is a signal that tea is
over.” He got up and drew out his gloves.

“Not at all. Shall you be here Saturday night?” She sat down on the
piano bench and leaned her elbow back on the keyboard. “Necker sings
ELIZABETH. Make Dr. Archie go. Everything she sings is worth hearing.”

“But she's failing so. The last time I heard her she had no voice at
all. She IS a poor vocalist!”

Thea cut him off. “She's a great artist, whether she's in voice or not,
and she's the only one here. If you want a big voice, you can take my
ORTRUDE of last night; that's big enough, and vulgar enough.”

Fred laughed and turned away, this time with decision. “I don't want
her!” he protested energetically. “I only wanted to get a rise out of
you. I like Necker's ELIZABETH well enough. I like your VENUS well
enough, too.”

“It's a beautiful part, and it's often dreadfully sung. It's very hard
to sing, of course.”

Ottenburg bent over the hand she held out to him. “For an uninvited
guest, I've fared very well. You were nice to let me come up. I'd have
been terribly cut up if you'd sent me away. May I?” He kissed her hand
lightly and backed toward the door, still smiling, and promising to keep
an eye on Archie. “He can't be trusted at all, Thea. One of the waiters
at Martin's worked a Tourainian hare off on him at luncheon yesterday,
for seven twenty-five.”

Thea broke into a laugh, the deep one he recognized. “Did he have a
ribbon on, this hare? Did they bring him in a gilt cage?”

“No,”--Archie spoke up for himself,--“they brought him in a brown sauce,
which was very good. He didn't taste very different from any rabbit.”

“Probably came from a push-cart on the East Side.” Thea looked at her
old friend commiseratingly. “Yes, DO keep an eye on him, Fred. I had no
idea,” shaking her head. “Yes, I'll be obliged to you.”

“Count on me!” Their eyes met in a gay smile, and Fred bowed himself
out.




VII

ON Saturday night Dr. Archie went with Fred Ottenburg to hear
“Tannhauser.” Thea had a rehearsal on Sunday afternoon, but as she was
not on the bill again until Wednesday, she promised to dine with Archie
and Ottenburg on Monday, if they could make the dinner early.

At a little after eight on Monday evening, the three friends returned to
Thea's apartment and seated themselves for an hour of quiet talk.

“I'm sorry we couldn't have had Landry with us tonight,” Thea said, “but
he's on at Weber and Fields' every night now. You ought to hear him, Dr.
Archie. He often sings the old Scotch airs you used to love.”

“Why not go down this evening?” Fred suggested hopefully, glancing at
his watch. “That is, if you'd like to go. I can telephone and find what
time he comes on.”

Thea hesitated. “No, I think not. I took a long walk this afternoon and
I'm rather tired. I think I can get to sleep early and be so much ahead.
I don't mean at once, however,” seeing Dr. Archie's disappointed look.
“I always like to hear Landry,” she added. “He never had much voice, and
it's worn, but there's a sweetness about it, and he sings with such
taste.”

“Yes, doesn't he? May I?” Fred took out his cigarette case. “It really
doesn't bother your throat?”

“A little doesn't. But cigar smoke does. Poor Dr. Archie! Can you do
with one of those?”

“I'm learning to like them,” the doctor declared, taking one from the
case Fred proffered him.

“Landry's the only fellow I know in this country who can do that sort of
thing,” Fred went on. “Like the best English ballad singers. He can sing
even popular stuff by higher lights, as it were.”

Thea nodded. “Yes; sometimes I make him sing his most foolish things for
me. It's restful, as he does it. That's when I'm homesick, Dr. Archie.”

“You knew him in Germany, Thea?” Dr. Archie had quietly abandoned his
cigarette as a comfortless article. “When you first went over?”

“Yes. He was a good friend to a green girl. He helped me with my German
and my music and my general discouragement. Seemed to care more about my
getting on than about himself. He had no money, either. An old aunt had
loaned him a little to study on.--Will you answer that, Fred?”

Fred caught up the telephone and stopped the buzz while Thea went on
talking to Dr. Archie about Landry. Telling some one to hold the wire,
he presently put down the instrument and approached Thea with a startled
expression on his face.

“It's the management,” he said quietly. “Gloeckler has broken down:
fainting fits. Madame Rheinecker is in Atlantic City and Schramm is
singing in Philadelphia tonight. They want to know whether you can come
down and finish SIEGLINDE.”

“What time is it?”

“Eight fifty-five. The first act is just over. They can hold the curtain
twenty-five minutes.”

Thea did not move. “Twenty-five and thirty-five makes sixty,” she
muttered. “Tell them I'll come if they hold the curtain till I am in the
dressing-room. Say I'll have to wear her costumes, and the dresser must
have everything ready. Then call a taxi, please.”

Thea had not changed her position since he first interrupted her, but
she had grown pale and was opening and shutting her hands rapidly. She
looked, Fred thought, terrified. He half turned toward the telephone,
but hung on one foot.

“Have you ever sung the part?” he asked.

“No, but I've rehearsed it. That's all right. Get the cab.” Still she
made no move. She merely turned perfectly blank eyes to Dr. Archie and
said absently, “It's curious, but just at this minute I can't remember a
bar of 'Walkure' after the first act. And I let my maid go out.” She
sprang up and beckoned Archie without so much, he felt sure, as knowing
who he was. “Come with me.” She went quickly into her sleeping-chamber
and threw open a door into a trunk-room. “See that white trunk? It's not
locked. It's full of wigs, in boxes. Look until you find one marked
'Ring 2.' Bring it quick!” While she directed him, she threw open a
square trunk and began tossing out shoes of every shape and color.

Ottenburg appeared at the door. “Can I help you?”

She threw him some white sandals with long laces and silk stockings
pinned to them. “Put those in something, and then go to the piano and
give me a few measures in there--you know.” She was behaving somewhat
like a cyclone now, and while she wrenched open drawers and closet
doors, Ottenburg got to the piano as quickly as possible and began to
herald the reappearance of the Volsung pair, trusting to memory.

In a few moments Thea came out enveloped in her long fur coat with a
scarf over her head and knitted woolen gloves on her hands. Her glassy
eye took in the fact that Fred was playing from memory, and even in her
distracted state, a faint smile flickered over her colorless lips. She
stretched out a woolly hand, “The score, please. Behind you, there.”

Dr. Archie followed with a canvas box and a satchel. As they went
through the hall, the men caught up their hats and coats. They left the
music-room, Fred noticed, just seven minutes after he got the telephone
message. In the elevator Thea said in that husky whisper which had so
perplexed Dr. Archie when he first heard it, “Tell the driver he must do
it in twenty minutes, less if he can. He must leave the light on in the
cab. I can do a good deal in twenty minutes. If only you hadn't made me
eat--Damn that duck!” she broke out bitterly; “why did you?”

“Wish I had it back! But it won't bother you, to-night. You need
strength,” he pleaded consolingly.

But she only muttered angrily under her breath, “Idiot, idiot!”

Ottenburg shot ahead and instructed the driver, while the doctor put
Thea into the cab and shut the door. She did not speak to either of them
again. As the driver scrambled into his seat she opened the score and
fixed her eyes upon it. Her face, in the white light, looked as bleak as
a stone quarry.

As her cab slid away, Ottenburg shoved Archie into a second taxi that
waited by the curb. “We'd better trail her,” he explained. “There might
be a hold-up of some kind.” As the cab whizzed off he broke into an
eruption of profanity.

“What's the matter, Fred?” the doctor asked. He was a good deal dazed by
the rapid evolutions of the last ten minutes.

“Matter enough!” Fred growled, buttoning his overcoat with a shiver.
“What a way to sing a part for the first time! That duck really is on my
conscience. It will be a wonder if she can do anything but quack!
Scrambling on in the middle of a performance like this, with no
rehearsal! The stuff she has to sing in there is a fright--rhythm,
pitch,--and terribly difficult intervals.”

“She looked frightened,” Dr. Archie said thoughtfully, “but I thought
she looked--determined.”

Fred sniffed. “Oh, determined! That's the kind of rough deal that makes
savages of singers. Here's a part she's worked on and got ready for for
years, and now they give her a chance to go on and butcher it. Goodness
knows when she's looked at the score last, or whether she can use the
business she's studied with this cast. Necker's singing BRUNNHILDE; she
may help her, if it's not one of her sore nights.”

“Is she sore at Thea?” Dr. Archie asked wonderingly.

“My dear man, Necker's sore at everything. She's breaking up; too early;
just when she ought to be at her best. There's one story that she is
struggling under some serious malady, another that she learned a bad
method at the Prague Conservatory and has ruined her organ. She's the
sorest thing in the world. If she weathers this winter through, it'll be
her last. She's paying for it with the last rags of her voice. And
then--” Fred whistled softly.

“Well, what then?”

“Then our girl may come in for some of it. It's dog eat dog, in this
game as in every other.”

The cab stopped and Fred and Dr. Archie hurried to the box office. The
Monday-night house was sold out. They bought standing room and entered
the auditorium just as the press representative of the house was
thanking the audience for their patience and telling them that although
Madame Gloeckler was too ill to sing, Miss Kronborg had kindly consented
to finish her part. This announcement was met with vehement applause
from the upper circles of the house.

“She has her--constituents,” Dr. Archie murmured.

“Yes, up there, where they're young and hungry. These people down here
have dined too well. They won't mind, however. They like fires and
accidents and DIVERTISSEMENTS. Two SIEGLINDES are more unusual than one,
so they'll be satisfied.”


After the final disappearance of the mother of Siegfried, Ottenburg and
the doctor slipped out through the crowd and left the house. Near the
stage entrance Fred found the driver who had brought Thea down. He
dismissed him and got a larger car. He and Archie waited on the
sidewalk, and when Kronborg came out alone they gathered her into the
cab and sprang in after her.

Thea sank back into a corner of the back seat and yawned. “Well, I got
through, eh?” Her tone was reassuring. “On the whole, I think I've given
you gentlemen a pretty lively evening, for one who has no social
accomplishments.”

“Rather! There was something like a popular uprising at the end of the
second act. Archie and I couldn't keep it up as long as the rest of them
did. A howl like that ought to show the management which way the wind is
blowing. You probably know you were magnificent.”

“I thought it went pretty well,” she spoke impartially. “I was rather
smart to catch his tempo there, at the beginning of the first
recitative, when he came in too soon, don't you think? It's tricky in
there, without a rehearsal. Oh, I was all right! He took that
syncopation too fast in the beginning. Some singers take it fast
there--think it sounds more impassioned. That's one way!” She sniffed,
and Fred shot a mirthful glance at Archie. Her boastfulness would have
been childish in a schoolboy. In the light of what she had done, of the
strain they had lived through during the last two hours, it made one
laugh,--almost cry. She went on, robustly: “And I didn't feel my dinner,
really, Fred. I am hungry again, I'm ashamed to say,--and I forgot to
order anything at my hotel.”

Fred put his hand on the door. “Where to? You must have food.”

“Do you know any quiet place, where I won't be stared at? I've still got
make-up on.”

“I do. Nice English chop-house on Forty-fourth Street. Nobody there at
night but theater people after the show, and a few bachelors.” He opened
the door and spoke to the driver.

As the car turned, Thea reached across to the front seat and drew Dr.
Archie's handkerchief out of his breast pocket.

“This comes to me naturally,” she said, rubbing her cheeks and eyebrows.
“When I was little I always loved your handkerchiefs because they were
silk and smelled of Cologne water. I think they must have been the only
really clean handkerchiefs in Moonstone. You were always wiping my face
with them, when you met me out in the dust, I remember. Did I never have
any?”

“I think you'd nearly always used yours up on your baby brother.”

Thea sighed. “Yes, Thor had such a way of getting messy. You say he's a
good chauffeur?” She closed her eyes for a moment as if they were tired.
Suddenly she looked up. “Isn't it funny, how we travel in circles? Here
you are, still getting me clean, and Fred is still feeding me. I would
have died of starvation at that boarding-house on Indiana Avenue if he
hadn't taken me out to the Buckingham and filled me up once in a while.
What a cavern I was to fill, too. The waiters used to look astonished.
I'm still singing on that food.”

Fred alighted and gave Thea his arm as they crossed the icy sidewalk.
They were taken upstairs in an antiquated lift and found the cheerful
chop-room half full of supper parties. An English company playing at the
Empire had just come in. The waiters, in red waistcoats, were hurrying
about. Fred got a table at the back of the room, in a corner, and urged
his waiter to get the oysters on at once.

“Takes a few minutes to open them, sir,” the man expostulated.

“Yes, but make it as few as possible, and bring the lady's first. Then
grilled chops with kidneys, and salad.”

Thea began eating celery stalks at once, from the base to the foliage.
“Necker said something nice to me tonight. You might have thought the
management would say something, but not they.” She looked at Fred from
under her blackened lashes. “It WAS a stunt, to jump in and sing that
second act without rehearsal. It doesn't sing itself.”

Ottenburg was watching her brilliant eyes and her face. She was much
handsomer than she had been early in the evening. Excitement of this
sort enriched her. It was only under such excitement, he reflected, that
she was entirely illuminated, or wholly present. At other times there
was something a little cold and empty, like a big room with no people in
it. Even in her most genial moods there was a shadow of restlessness, as
if she were waiting for something and were exercising the virtue of
patience. During dinner she had been as kind as she knew how to be, to
him and to Archie, and had given them as much of herself as she could.
But, clearly, she knew only one way of being really kind, from the core
of her heart out; and there was but one way in which she could give
herself to people largely and gladly, spontaneously. Even as a girl she
had been at her best in vigorous effort, he remembered; physical effort,
when there was no other kind at hand. She could be expansive only in
explosions. Old Nathanmeyer had seen it. In the very first song Fred had
ever heard her sing, she had unconsciously declared it.

Thea Kronborg turned suddenly from her talk with Archie and peered
suspiciously into the corner where Ottenburg sat with folded arms,
observing her. “What's the matter with you, Fred? I'm afraid of you when
you're quiet,--fortunately you almost never are. What are you thinking
about?”

“I was wondering how you got right with the orchestra so quickly, there
at first. I had a flash of terror,” he replied easily.

She bolted her last oyster and ducked her head. “So had I! I don't know
how I did catch it. Desperation, I suppose; same way the Indian babies
swim when they're thrown into the river. I HAD to. Now it's over, I'm
glad I had to. I learned a whole lot to-night.”

Archie, who usually felt that it behooved him to be silent during such
discussions, was encouraged by her geniality to venture, “I don't see
how you can learn anything in such a turmoil; or how you can keep your
mind on it, for that matter.”

Thea glanced about the room and suddenly put her hand up to her hair.
“Mercy, I've no hat on! Why didn't you tell me? And I seem to be wearing
a rumpled dinner dress, with all this paint on my face! I must look like
something you picked up on Second Avenue. I hope there are no Colorado
reformers about, Dr. Archie. What a dreadful old pair these people must
be thinking you! Well, I had to eat.” She sniffed the savor of the grill
as the waiter uncovered it. “Yes, draught beer, please. No, thank you,
Fred, NO champagne.--To go back to your question, Dr. Archie, you can
believe I keep my mind on it. That's the whole trick, in so far as stage
experience goes; keeping right there every second. If I think of
anything else for a flash, I'm gone, done for. But at the same time, one
can take things in--with another part of your brain, maybe. It's
different from what you get in study, more practical and conclusive.
There are some things you learn best in calm, and some in storm. You
learn the delivery of a part only before an audience.”

“Heaven help us,” gasped Ottenburg. “Weren't you hungry, though! It's
beautiful to see you eat.”

“Glad you like it. Of course I'm hungry. Are you staying over for
'Rheingold' Friday afternoon?”

“My dear Thea,”--Fred lit a cigarette,--“I'm a serious business man now.
I have to sell beer. I'm due in Chicago on Wednesday. I'd come back to
hear you, but FRICKA is not an alluring part.”

“Then you've never heard it well done.” She spoke up hotly. “Fat German
woman scolding her husband, eh? That's not my idea. Wait till you hear
my FRICKA. It's a beautiful part.” Thea leaned forward on the table and
touched Archie's arm. “You remember, Dr. Archie, how my mother always
wore her hair, parted in the middle and done low on her neck behind, so
you got the shape of her head and such a calm, white forehead? I wear
mine like that for FRICKA. A little more coronet effect, built up a
little higher at the sides, but the idea's the same. I think you'll
notice it.” She turned to Ottenburg reproachfully: “It's noble music,
Fred, from the first measure. There's nothing lovelier than the WONNIGER
HAUSRATH. It's all such comprehensive sort of music--fateful. Of course,
FRICKA KNOWS,” Thea ended quietly.

Fred sighed. “There, you've spoiled my itinerary. Now I'll have to come
back, of course. Archie, you'd better get busy about seats to-morrow.”

“I can get you box seats, somewhere. I know nobody here, and I never ask
for any.” Thea began hunting among her wraps. “Oh, how funny! I've only
these short woolen gloves, and no sleeves. Put on my coat first. Those
English people can't make out where you got your lady, she's so made up
of contradictions.” She rose laughing and plunged her arms into the coat
Dr. Archie held for her. As she settled herself into it and buttoned it
under her chin, she gave him an old signal with her eyelid. “I'd like to
sing another part to-night. This is the sort of evening I fancy, when
there's something to do. Let me see: I have to sing in 'Trovatore'
Wednesday night, and there are rehearsals for the 'Ring' every day this
week. Consider me dead until Saturday, Dr. Archie. I invite you both to
dine with me on Saturday night, the day after 'Rheingold.' And Fred must
leave early, for I want to talk to you alone. You've been here nearly a
week, and I haven't had a serious word with you. TAK FOR MAD, Fred, as
the Norwegians say.”




VIII

THE “Ring of the Niebelungs” was to be given at the Metropolitan on four
successive Friday afternoons. After the first of these performances,
Fred Ottenburg went home with Landry for tea. Landry was one of the few
public entertainers who own real estate in New York. He lived in a
little three-story brick house on Jane Street, in Greenwich Village,
which had been left to him by the same aunt who paid for his musical
education.

Landry was born, and spent the first fifteen years of his life, on a
rocky Connecticut farm not far from Cos Cob. His father was an ignorant,
violent man, a bungling farmer and a brutal husband. The farmhouse,
dilapidated and damp, stood in a hollow beside a marshy pond. Oliver had
worked hard while he lived at home, although he was never clean or warm
in winter and had wretched food all the year round. His spare, dry
figure, his prominent larynx, and the peculiar red of his face and hands
belonged to the choreboy he had never outgrown. It was as if the farm,
knowing he would escape from it as early as he could, had ground its
mark on him deep. When he was fifteen Oliver ran away and went to live
with his Catholic aunt, on Jane Street, whom his mother was never
allowed to visit. The priest of St. Joseph's Parish discovered that he
had a voice.

Landry had an affection for the house on Jane Street, where he had first
learned what cleanliness and order and courtesy were. When his aunt died
he had the place done over, got an Irish housekeeper, and lived there
with a great many beautiful things he had collected. His living expenses
were never large, but he could not restrain himself from buying graceful
and useless objects. He was a collector for much the same reason that he
was a Catholic, and he was a Catholic chiefly because his father used to
sit in the kitchen and read aloud to his hired men disgusting
“exposures” of the Roman Church, enjoying equally the hideous stories
and the outrage to his wife's feelings.

At first Landry bought books; then rugs, drawings, china. He had a
beautiful collection of old French and Spanish fans. He kept them in an
escritoire he had brought from Spain, but there were always a few of
them lying about in his sitting-room.

While Landry and his guest were waiting for the tea to be brought,
Ottenburg took up one of these fans from the low marble mantel-shelf and
opened it in the firelight. One side was painted with a pearly sky and
floating clouds. On the other was a formal garden where an elegant
shepherdess with a mask and crook was fleeing on high heels from a
satin-coated shepherd.

“You ought not to keep these things about, like this, Oliver. The dust
from your grate must get at them.”

“It does, but I get them to enjoy them, not to have them. They're
pleasant to glance at and to play with at odd times like this, when one
is waiting for tea or something.”

Fred smiled. The idea of Landry stretched out before his fire playing
with his fans, amused him. Mrs. McGinnis brought the tea and put it
before the hearth: old teacups that were velvety to the touch and a
pot-bellied silver cream pitcher of an Early Georgian pattern, which was
always brought, though Landry took rum.

Fred drank his tea walking about, examining Landry's sumptuous
writing-table in the alcove and the Boucher drawing in red chalk over
the mantel. “I don't see how you can stand this place without a heroine.
It would give me a raging thirst for gallantries.”

Landry was helping himself to a second cup of tea. “Works quite the
other way with me. It consoles me for the lack of her. It's just
feminine enough to be pleasant to return to. Not any more tea? Then sit
down and play for me. I'm always playing for other people, and I never
have a chance to sit here quietly and listen.”

Ottenburg opened the piano and began softly to boom forth the shadowy
introduction to the opera they had just heard. “Will that do?” he asked
jokingly. “I can't seem to get it out of my head.”

“Oh, excellently! Thea told me it was quite wonderful, the way you can
do Wagner scores on the piano. So few people can give one any idea of
the music. Go ahead, as long as you like. I can smoke, too.” Landry
flattened himself out on his cushions and abandoned himself to ease with
the circumstance of one who has never grown quite accustomed to ease.

Ottenburg played on, as he happened to remember. He understood now why
Thea wished him to hear her in “Rheingold.” It had been clear to him as
soon as FRICKA rose from sleep and looked out over the young world,
stretching one white arm toward the new Gotterburg shining on the
heights. “WOTAN! GEMAHL! ERWACHE!” She was pure Scandinavian, this
FRICKA: “Swedish summer”! he remembered old Mr. Nathanmeyer's phrase.
She had wished him to see her because she had a distinct kind of
loveliness for this part, a shining beauty like the light of sunset on
distant sails. She seemed to take on the look of immortal loveliness,
the youth of the golden apples, the shining body and the shining mind.
FRICKA had been a jealous spouse to him for so long that he had forgot
she meant wisdom before she meant domestic order, and that, in any
event, she was always a goddess. The FRICKA of that afternoon was so
clear and sunny, so nobly conceived, that she made a whole atmosphere
about herself and quite redeemed from shabbiness the helplessness and
unscrupulousness of the gods. Her reproaches to WOTAN were the pleadings
of a tempered mind, a consistent sense of beauty. In the long silences
of her part, her shining presence was a visible complement to the
discussion of the orchestra. As the themes which were to help in weaving
the drama to its end first came vaguely upon the ear, one saw their
import and tendency in the face of this clearest-visioned of the gods.

In the scene between FRICKA and WOTAN, Ottenburg stopped. “I can't seem
to get the voices, in there.”

Landry chuckled. “Don't try. I know it well enough. I expect I've been
over that with her a thousand times. I was playing for her almost every
day when she was first working on it. When she begins with a part she's
hard to work with: so slow you'd think she was stupid if you didn't know
her. Of course she blames it all on her accompanist. It goes on like
that for weeks sometimes. This did. She kept shaking her head and
staring and looking gloomy. All at once, she got her line--it usually
comes suddenly, after stretches of not getting anywhere at all--and
after that it kept changing and clearing. As she worked her voice into
it, it got more and more of that 'gold' quality that makes her FRICKA so
different.”

Fred began FRICKA'S first aria again. “It's certainly different. Curious
how she does it. Such a beautiful idea, out of a part that's always been
so ungrateful. She's a lovely thing, but she was never so beautiful as
that, really. Nobody is.” He repeated the loveliest phrase. “How does
she manage it, Landry? You've worked with her.”

Landry drew cherishingly on the last cigarette he meant to permit
himself before singing. “Oh, it's a question of a big personality--and
all that goes with it. Brains, of course. Imagination, of course. But
the important thing is that she was born full of color, with a rich
personality. That's a gift of the gods, like a fine nose. You have it,
or you haven't. Against it, intelligence and musicianship and habits of
industry don't count at all. Singers are a conventional race. When Thea
was studying in Berlin the other girls were mortally afraid of her. She
has a pretty rough hand with women, dull ones, and she could be rude,
too! The girls used to call her DIE WOLFIN.”

Fred thrust his hands into his pockets and leaned back against the
piano. “Of course, even a stupid woman could get effects with such
machinery: such a voice and body and face. But they couldn't possibly
belong to a stupid woman, could they?”

Landry shook his head. “It's personality; that's as near as you can come
to it. That's what constitutes real equipment. What she does is
interesting because she does it. Even the things she discards are
suggestive. I regret some of them. Her conceptions are colored in so
many different ways. You've heard her ELIZABETH? Wonderful, isn't it?
She was working on that part years ago when her mother was ill. I could
see her anxiety and grief getting more and more into the part. The last
act is heart-breaking. It's as homely as a country prayer meeting: might
be any lonely woman getting ready to die. It's full of the thing every
plain creature finds out for himself, but that never gets written down.
It's unconscious memory, maybe; inherited memory, like folk-music. I
call it personality.”

Fred laughed, and turning to the piano began coaxing the FRICKA music
again. “Call it anything you like, my boy. I have a name for it myself,
but I shan't tell you.” He looked over his shoulder at Landry, stretched
out by the fire. “You have a great time watching her, don't you?”

“Oh, yes!” replied Landry simply. “I'm not interested in much that goes
on in New York. Now, if you'll excuse me, I'll have to dress.” He rose
with a reluctant sigh. “Can I get you anything? Some whiskey?”

“Thank you, no. I'll amuse myself here. I don't often get a chance at a
good piano when I'm away from home. You haven't had this one long, have
you? Action's a bit stiff. I say,” he stopped Landry in the doorway,
“has Thea ever been down here?”

Landry turned back. “Yes. She came several times when I had erysipelas.
I was a nice mess, with two nurses. She brought down some inside
window-boxes, planted with crocuses and things. Very cheering, only I
couldn't see them or her.”

“Didn't she like your place?”

“She thought she did, but I fancy it was a good deal cluttered up for
her taste. I could hear her pacing about like something in a cage. She
pushed the piano back against the wall and the chairs into corners, and
she broke my amber elephant.” Landry took a yellow object some four
inches high from one of his low bookcases. “You can see where his leg is
glued on,--a souvenir. Yes, he's lemon amber, very fine.”

Landry disappeared behind the curtains and in a moment Fred heard the
wheeze of an atomizer. He put the amber elephant on the piano beside him
and seemed to get a great deal of amusement out of the beast.




IX

WHEN Archie and Ottenburg dined with Thea on Saturday evening, they were
served downstairs in the hotel dining-room, but they were to have their
coffee in her own apartment. As they were going up in the elevator after
dinner, Fred turned suddenly to Thea. “And why, please, did you break
Landry's amber elephant?”

She looked guilty and began to laugh. “Hasn't he got over that yet? I
didn't really mean to break it. I was perhaps careless. His things are
so over-petted that I was tempted to be careless with a lot of them.”

“How can you be so heartless, when they're all he has in the world?”

“He has me. I'm a great deal of diversion for him; all he needs. There,”
 she said as she opened the door into her own hall, “I shouldn't have
said that before the elevator boy.”

“Even an elevator boy couldn't make a scandal about Oliver. He's such a
catnip man.”

Dr. Archie laughed, but Thea, who seemed suddenly to have thought of
something annoying, repeated blankly, “Catnip man?”

“Yes, he lives on catnip, and rum tea. But he's not the only one. You
are like an eccentric old woman I know in Boston, who goes about in the
spring feeding catnip to street cats. You dispense it to a lot of
fellows. Your pull seems to be more with men than with women, you know;
with seasoned men, about my age, or older. Even on Friday afternoon I
kept running into them, old boys I hadn't seen for years, thin at the
part and thick at the girth, until I stood still in the draft and held
my hair on. They're always there; I hear them talking about you in the
smoking room. Probably we don't get to the point of apprehending
anything good until we're about forty. Then, in the light of what is
going, and of what, God help us! is coming, we arrive at understanding.”

“I don't see why people go to the opera, anyway,--serious people.” She
spoke discontentedly. “I suppose they get something, or think they do.
Here's the coffee. There, please,” she directed the waiter. Going to the
table she began to pour the coffee, standing. She wore a white dress
trimmed with crystals which had rattled a good deal during dinner, as
all her movements had been impatient and nervous, and she had twisted
the dark velvet rose at her girdle until it looked rumpled and weary.
She poured the coffee as if it were a ceremony in which she did not
believe. “Can you make anything of Fred's nonsense, Dr. Archie?” she
asked, as he came to take his cup.

Fred approached her. “My nonsense is all right. The same brand has gone
with you before. It's you who won't be jollied. What's the matter? You
have something on your mind.”

“I've a good deal. Too much to be an agreeable hostess.” She turned
quickly away from the coffee and sat down on the piano bench, facing the
two men. “For one thing, there's a change in the cast for Friday
afternoon. They're going to let me sing SIEGLINDE.” Her frown did not
conceal the pleasure with which she made this announcement.

“Are you going to keep us dangling about here forever, Thea? Archie and
I are supposed to have other things to do.” Fred looked at her with an
excitement quite as apparent as her own.

“Here I've been ready to sing SIEGLINDE for two years, kept in torment,
and now it comes off within two weeks, just when I want to be seeing
something of Dr. Archie. I don't know what their plans are down there.
After Friday they may let me cool for several weeks, and they may rush
me. I suppose it depends somewhat on how things go Friday afternoon.”

“Oh, they'll go fast enough! That's better suited to your voice than
anything you've sung here. That gives you every opportunity I've waited
for.” Ottenburg crossed the room and standing beside her began to play
“DU BIST DER LENZ.”

With a violent movement Thea caught his wrists and pushed his hands away
from the keys.

“Fred, can't you be serious? A thousand things may happen between this
and Friday to put me out. Something will happen. If that part were sung
well, as well as it ought to be, it would be one of the most beautiful
things in the world. That's why it never is sung right, and never will
be.” She clenched her hands and opened them despairingly, looking out of
the open window. “It's inaccessibly beautiful!” she brought out sharply.

Fred and Dr. Archie watched her. In a moment she turned back to them.
“It's impossible to sing a part like that well for the first time,
except for the sort who will never sing it any better. Everything hangs
on that first night, and that's bound to be bad. There you are,” she
shrugged impatiently. “For one thing, they change the cast at the
eleventh hour and then rehearse the life out of me.”

Ottenburg put down his cup with exaggerated care. “Still, you really
want to do it, you know.”

“Want to?” she repeated indignantly; “of course I want to! If this were
only next Thursday night--But between now and Friday I'll do nothing but
fret away my strength. Oh, I'm not saying I don't need the rehearsals!
But I don't need them strung out through a week. That system's well
enough for phlegmatic singers; it only drains me. Every single feature
of operatic routine is detrimental to me. I usually go on like a horse
that's been fixed to lose a race. I have to work hard to do my worst,
let alone my best. I wish you could hear me sing well, once,” she turned
to Fred defiantly; “I have, a few times in my life, when there was
nothing to gain by it.”

Fred approached her again and held out his hand. “I recall my
instructions, and now I'll leave you to fight it out with Archie. He
can't possibly represent managerial stupidity to you as I seem to have a
gift for doing.”

As he smiled down at her, his good humor, his good wishes, his
understanding, embarrassed her and recalled her to herself. She kept her
seat, still holding his hand. “All the same, Fred, isn't it too bad,
that there are so many things--” She broke off with a shake of the head.

“My dear girl, if I could bridge over the agony between now and Friday
for you--But you know the rules of the game; why torment yourself? You
saw the other night that you had the part under your thumb. Now walk,
sleep, play with Archie, keep your tiger hungry, and she'll spring all
right on Friday. I'll be there to see her, and there'll be more than I,
I suspect. Harsanyi's on the Wilhelm der Grosse; gets in on Thursday.”

“Harsanyi?” Thea's eye lighted. “I haven't seen him for years. We always
miss each other.” She paused, hesitating. “Yes, I should like that. But
he'll be busy, maybe?”

“He gives his first concert at Carnegie Hall, week after next. Better
send him a box if you can.”

“Yes, I'll manage it.” Thea took his hand again. “Oh, I should like
that, Fred!” she added impulsively. “Even if I were put out, he'd get
the idea,”--she threw back her head,--“for there is an idea!”

“Which won't penetrate here,” he tapped his brow and began to laugh.
“You are an ungrateful huzzy, COMME LES AUTRES!”

Thea detained him as he turned away. She pulled a flower out of a
bouquet on the piano and absently drew the stem through the lapel of his
coat. “I shall be walking in the Park to-morrow afternoon, on the
reservoir path, between four and five, if you care to join me. You know
that after Harsanyi I'd rather please you than anyone else. You know a
lot, but he knows even more than you.”

“Thank you. Don't try to analyze it. SCHLAFEN SIE WOHL!” he kissed her
fingers and waved from the door, closing it behind him.

“He's the right sort, Thea.” Dr. Archie looked warmly after his
disappearing friend. “I've always hoped you'd make it up with Fred.”

“Well, haven't I? Oh, marry him, you mean! Perhaps it may come about,
some day. Just at present he's not in the marriage market any more than
I am, is he?”

“No, I suppose not. It's a damned shame that a man like Ottenburg should
be tied up as he is, wasting all the best years of his life. A woman
with general paresis ought to be legally dead.”

“Don't let us talk about Fred's wife, please. He had no business to get
into such a mess, and he had no business to stay in it. He's always been
a softy where women were concerned.”

“Most of us are, I'm afraid,” Dr. Archie admitted meekly.

“Too much light in here, isn't there? Tires one's eyes. The stage lights
are hard on mine.” Thea began turning them out. “We'll leave the little
one, over the piano.” She sank down by Archie on the deep sofa. “We two
have so much to talk about that we keep away from it altogether; have
you noticed? We don't even nibble the edges. I wish we had Landry here
to-night to play for us. He's very comforting.”

“I'm afraid you don't have enough personal life, outside your work,
Thea.” The doctor looked at her anxiously.

She smiled at him with her eyes half closed. “My dear doctor, I don't
have any. Your work becomes your personal life. You are not much good
until it does. It's like being woven into a big web. You can't pull
away, because all your little tendrils are woven into the picture. It
takes you up, and uses you, and spins you out; and that is your life.
Not much else can happen to you.”

“Didn't you think of marrying, several years ago?”

“You mean Nordquist? Yes; but I changed my mind. We had been singing a
good deal together. He's a splendid creature.”

“Were you much in love with him, Thea?” the doctor asked hopefully.

She smiled again. “I don't think I know just what that expression means.
I've never been able to find out. I think I was in love with you when I
was little, but not with any one since then. There are a great many ways
of caring for people. It's not, after all, a simple state, like measles
or tonsilitis. Nordquist is a taking sort of man. He and I were out in a
rowboat once in a terrible storm. The lake was fed by glaciers,--ice
water,--and we couldn't have swum a stroke if the boat had filled. If we
hadn't both been strong and kept our heads, we'd have gone down. We
pulled for every ounce there was in us, and we just got off with our
lives. We were always being thrown together like that, under some kind
of pressure. Yes, for a while I thought he would make everything right.”
 She paused and sank back, resting her head on a cushion, pressing her
eyelids down with her fingers. “You see,” she went on abruptly, “he had
a wife and two children. He hadn't lived with her for several years, but
when she heard that he wanted to marry again, she began to make trouble.
He earned a good deal of money, but he was careless and always
wretchedly in debt. He came to me one day and told me he thought his
wife would settle for a hundred thousand marks and consent to a divorce.
I got very angry and sent him away. Next day he came back and said he
thought she'd take fifty thousand.”

Dr. Archie drew away from her, to the end of the sofa.

“Good God, Thea,”--He ran his handkerchief over his forehead. “What sort
of people--” He stopped and shook his head.

Thea rose and stood beside him, her hand on his shoulder. “That's
exactly how it struck me,” she said quietly. “Oh, we have things in
common, things that go away back, under everything. You understand, of
course. Nordquist didn't. He thought I wasn't willing to part with the
money. I couldn't let myself buy him from Fru Nordquist, and he couldn't
see why. He had always thought I was close about money, so he attributed
it to that. I am careful,”--she ran her arm through Archie's and when he
rose began to walk about the room with him. “I can't be careless with
money. I began the world on six hundred dollars, and it was the price of
a man's life. Ray Kennedy had worked hard and been sober and denied
himself, and when he died he had six hundred dollars to show for it. I
always measure things by that six hundred dollars, just as I measure
high buildings by the Moonstone standpipe. There are standards we can't
get away from.”

Dr. Archie took her hand. “I don't believe we should be any happier if
we did get away from them. I think it gives you some of your poise,
having that anchor. You look,” glancing down at her head and shoulders,
“sometimes so like your mother.”

“Thank you. You couldn't say anything nicer to me than that. On Friday
afternoon, didn't you think?”

“Yes, but at other times, too. I love to see it. Do you know what I
thought about that first night when I heard you sing? I kept remembering
the night I took care of you when you had pneumonia, when you were ten
years old. You were a terribly sick child, and I was a country doctor
without much experience. There were no oxygen tanks about then. You
pretty nearly slipped away from me. If you had--”

Thea dropped her head on his shoulder. “I'd have saved myself and you a
lot of trouble, wouldn't I? Dear Dr. Archie!” she murmured.

“As for me, life would have been a pretty bleak stretch, with you left
out.” The doctor took one of the crystal pendants that hung from her
shoulder and looked into it thoughtfully. “I guess I'm a romantic old
fellow, underneath. And you've always been my romance. Those years when
you were growing up were my happiest. When I dream about you, I always
see you as a little girl.”

They paused by the open window. “Do you? Nearly all my dreams, except
those about breaking down on the stage or missing trains, are about
Moonstone. You tell me the old house has been pulled down, but it stands
in my mind, every stick and timber. In my sleep I go all about it, and
look in the right drawers and cupboards for everything. I often dream
that I'm hunting for my rubbers in that pile of overshoes that was
always under the hatrack in the hall. I pick up every overshoe and know
whose it is, but I can't find my own. Then the school bell begins to
ring and I begin to cry. That's the house I rest in when I'm tired. All
the old furniture and the worn spots in the carpet--it rests my mind to
go over them.”

They were looking out of the window. Thea kept his arm. Down on the
river four battleships were anchored in line, brilliantly lighted, and
launches were coming and going, bringing the men ashore. A searchlight
from one of the ironclads was playing on the great headland up the
river, where it makes its first resolute turn. Overhead the night-blue
sky was intense and clear.

“There's so much that I want to tell you,” she said at last, “and it's
hard to explain. My life is full of jealousies and disappointments, you
know. You get to hating people who do contemptible work and who get on
just as well as you do. There are many disappointments in my profession,
and bitter, bitter contempts!” Her face hardened, and looked much older.
“If you love the good thing vitally, enough to give up for it all that
one must give up for it, then you must hate the cheap thing just as
hard. I tell you, there is such a thing as creative hate! A contempt
that drives you through fire, makes you risk everything and lose
everything, makes you a long sight better than you ever knew you could
be.” As she glanced at Dr. Archie's face, Thea stopped short and turned
her own face away. Her eyes followed the path of the searchlight up the
river and rested upon the illumined headland.

“You see,” she went on more calmly, “voices are accidental things. You
find plenty of good voices in common women, with common minds and common
hearts. Look at that woman who sang ORTRUDE with me last week. She's new
here and the people are wild about her. 'Such a beautiful volume of
tone!' they say. I give you my word she's as stupid as an owl and as
coarse as a pig, and any one who knows anything about singing would see
that in an instant. Yet she's quite as popular as Necker, who's a great
artist. How can I get much satisfaction out of the enthusiasm of a house
that likes her atrociously bad performance at the same time that it
pretends to like mine? If they like her, then they ought to hiss me off
the stage. We stand for things that are irreconcilable, absolutely. You
can't try to do things right and not despise the people who do them
wrong. How can I be indifferent? If that doesn't matter, then nothing
matters. Well, sometimes I've come home as I did the other night when
you first saw me, so full of bitterness that it was as if my mind were
full of daggers. And I've gone to sleep and wakened up in the Kohlers'
garden, with the pigeons and the white rabbits, so happy! And that saves
me.” She sat down on the piano bench. Archie thought she had forgotten
all about him, until she called his name. Her voice was soft now, and
wonderfully sweet. It seemed to come from somewhere deep within her,
there were such strong vibrations in it. “You see, Dr. Archie, what one
really strives for in art is not the sort of thing you are likely to
find when you drop in for a performance at the opera. What one strives
for is so far away, so deep, so beautiful”--she lifted her shoulders
with a long breath, folded her hands in her lap and sat looking at him
with a resignation that made her face noble,--“that there's nothing one
can say about it, Dr. Archie.”

Without knowing very well what it was all about, Archie was passionately
stirred for her. “I've always believed in you, Thea; always believed,”
 he muttered.

She smiled and closed her eyes. “They save me: the old things, things
like the Kohlers' garden. They are in everything I do.”

“In what you sing, you mean?”

“Yes. Not in any direct way,”--she spoke hurriedly,--“the light, the
color, the feeling. Most of all the feeling. It comes in when I'm
working on a part, like the smell of a garden coming in at the window. I
try all the new things, and then go back to the old. Perhaps my feelings
were stronger then. A child's attitude toward everything is an artist's
attitude. I am more or less of an artist now, but then I was nothing
else. When I went with you to Chicago that first time, I carried with me
the essentials, the foundation of all I do now. The point to which I
could go was scratched in me then. I haven't reached it yet, by a long
way.”

Archie had a swift flash of memory. Pictures passed before him. “You
mean,” he asked wonderingly, “that you knew then that you were so
gifted?”

Thea looked up at him and smiled. “Oh, I didn't know anything! Not
enough to ask you for my trunk when I needed it. But you see, when I set
out from Moonstone with you, I had had a rich, romantic past. I had
lived a long, eventful life, and an artist's life, every hour of it.
Wagner says, in his most beautiful opera, that art is only a way of
remembering youth. And the older we grow the more precious it seems to
us, and the more richly we can present that memory. When we've got it
all out,--the last, the finest thrill of it, the brightest hope of
it,”--she lifted her hand above her head and dropped it,--“then we stop.
We do nothing but repeat after that. The stream has reached the level of
its source. That's our measure.”

There was a long, warm silence. Thea was looking hard at the floor, as
if she were seeing down through years and years, and her old friend
stood watching her bent head. His look was one with which he used to
watch her long ago, and which, even in thinking about her, had become a
habit of his face. It was full of solicitude, and a kind of secret
gratitude, as if to thank her for some inexpressible pleasure of the
heart. Thea turned presently toward the piano and began softly to waken
an old air:--


     “Ca' the yowes to the knowes,
     Ca' them where the heather grows,
     Ca' them where the burnie rowes,
     My bonnie dear-ie.”


Archie sat down and shaded his eyes with his hand. She turned her head
and spoke to him over her shoulder. “Come on, you know the words better
than I. That's right.”


“We'll gae down by Clouden's side, Through the hazels spreading wide,
O'er the waves that sweetly glide, To the moon sae clearly. Ghaist nor
bogle shalt thou fear, Thou'rt to love and Heav'n sae dear, Nocht of ill
may come thee near, My bonnie dear-ie!”


“We can get on without Landry. Let's try it again, I have all the words
now. Then we'll have 'Sweet Afton.' Come: 'CA' THE YOWES TO THE
KNOWES'--”




X

OTTENBURG dismissed his taxicab at the 91st Street entrance of the Park
and floundered across the drive through a wild spring snowstorm. When he
reached the reservoir path he saw Thea ahead of him, walking rapidly
against the wind. Except for that one figure, the path was deserted. A
flock of gulls were hovering over the reservoir, seeming bewildered by
the driving currents of snow that whirled above the black water and then
disappeared within it. When he had almost overtaken Thea, Fred called to
her, and she turned and waited for him with her back to the wind. Her
hair and furs were powdered with snowflakes, and she looked like some
rich-pelted animal, with warm blood, that had run in out of the woods.
Fred laughed as he took her hand.

“No use asking how you do. You surely needn't feel much anxiety about
Friday, when you can look like this.”

She moved close to the iron fence to make room for him beside her, and
faced the wind again. “Oh, I'm WELL enough, in so far as that goes. But
I'm not lucky about stage appearances. I'm easily upset, and the most
perverse things happen.”

“What's the matter? Do you still get nervous?”

“Of course I do. I don't mind nerves so much as getting numbed,” Thea
muttered, sheltering her face for a moment with her muff. “I'm under a
spell, you know, hoodooed. It's the thing I WANT to do that I can never
do. Any other effects I can get easily enough.”

“Yes, you get effects, and not only with your voice. That's where you
have it over all the rest of them; you're as much at home on the stage
as you were down in Panther Canyon--as if you'd just been let out of a
cage. Didn't you get some of your ideas down there?”

Thea nodded. “Oh, yes! For heroic parts, at least. Out of the rocks, out
of the dead people. You mean the idea of standing up under things, don't
you, meeting catastrophe? No fussiness. Seems to me they must have been
a reserved, somber people, with only a muscular language, all their
movements for a purpose; simple, strong, as if they were dealing with
fate bare-handed.” She put her gloved fingers on Fred's arm. “I don't
know how I can ever thank you enough. I don't know if I'd ever have got
anywhere without Panther Canyon. How did you know that was the one thing
to do for me? It's the sort of thing nobody ever helps one to, in this
world. One can learn how to sing, but no singing teacher can give
anybody what I got down there. How did you know?”

“I didn't know. Anything else would have done as well. It was your
creative hour. I knew you were getting a lot, but I didn't realize how
much.”

Thea walked on in silence. She seemed to be thinking.

“Do you know what they really taught me?” she came out suddenly. “They
taught me the inevitable hardness of human life. No artist gets far who
doesn't know that. And you can't know it with your mind. You have to
realize it in your body, somehow; deep. It's an animal sort of feeling.
I sometimes think it's the strongest of all. Do you know what I'm
driving at?”

“I think so. Even your audiences feel it, vaguely: that you've sometime
or other faced things that make you different.”

Thea turned her back to the wind, wiping away the snow that clung to her
brows and lashes. “Ugh!” she exclaimed; “no matter how long a breath you
have, the storm has a longer. I haven't signed for next season, yet,
Fred. I'm holding out for a big contract: forty performances. Necker
won't be able to do much next winter. It's going to be one of those
between seasons; the old singers are too old, and the new ones are too
new. They might as well risk me as anybody. So I want good terms. The
next five or six years are going to be my best.”

“You'll get what you demand, if you are uncompromising. I'm safe in
congratulating you now.”

Thea laughed. “It's a little early. I may not get it at all. They don't
seem to be breaking their necks to meet me. I can go back to Dresden.”

As they turned the curve and walked westward they got the wind from the
side, and talking was easier.

Fred lowered his collar and shook the snow from his shoulders. “Oh, I
don't mean on the contract particularly. I congratulate you on what you
can do, Thea, and on all that lies behind what you do. On the life
that's led up to it, and on being able to care so much. That, after all,
is the unusual thing.”

She looked at him sharply, with a certain apprehension. “Care? Why
shouldn't I care? If I didn't, I'd be in a bad way. What else have I
got?” She stopped with a challenging interrogation, but Ottenburg did
not reply. “You mean,” she persisted, “that you don't care as much as
you used to?”

“I care about your success, of course.” Fred fell into a slower pace.
Thea felt at once that he was talking seriously and had dropped the tone
of half-ironical exaggeration he had used with her of late years. “And
I'm grateful to you for what you demand from yourself, when you might
get off so easily. You demand more and more all the time, and you'll do
more and more. One is grateful to anybody for that; it makes life in
general a little less sordid. But as a matter of fact, I'm not much
interested in how anybody sings anything.”

“That's too bad of you, when I'm just beginning to see what is worth
doing, and how I want to do it!” Thea spoke in an injured tone.

“That's what I congratulate you on. That's the great difference between
your kind and the rest of us. It's how long you're able to keep it up
that tells the story. When you needed enthusiasm from the outside, I was
able to give it to you. Now you must let me withdraw.”

“I'm not tying you, am I?” she flashed out. “But withdraw to what? What
do you want?”

Fred shrugged. “I might ask you, What have I got? I want things that
wouldn't interest you; that you probably wouldn't understand. For one
thing, I want a son to bring up.”

“I can understand that. It seems to me reasonable. Have you also found
somebody you want to marry?”

“Not particularly.” They turned another curve, which brought the wind to
their backs, and they walked on in comparative calm, with the snow
blowing past them. “It's not your fault, Thea, but I've had you too much
in my mind. I've not given myself a fair chance in other directions. I
was in Rome when you and Nordquist were there. If that had kept up, it
might have cured me.”

“It might have cured a good many things,” remarked Thea grimly.

Fred nodded sympathetically and went on. “In my library in St. Louis,
over the fireplace, I have a property spear I had copied from one in
Venice,--oh, years ago, after you first went abroad, while you were
studying. You'll probably be singing BRUNNHILDE pretty soon now, and
I'll send it on to you, if I may. You can take it and its history for
what they're worth. But I'm nearly forty years old, and I've served my
turn. You've done what I hoped for you, what I was honestly willing to
lose you for--then. I'm older now, and I think I was an ass. I wouldn't
do it again if I had the chance, not much! But I'm not sorry. It takes a
great many people to make one--BRUNNHILDE.”

Thea stopped by the fence and looked over into the black choppiness on
which the snowflakes fell and disappeared with magical rapidity. Her
face was both angry and troubled. “So you really feel I've been
ungrateful. I thought you sent me out to get something. I didn't know
you wanted me to bring in something easy. I thought you wanted
something--” She took a deep breath and shrugged her shoulders. “But
there! nobody on God's earth wants it, REALLY! If one other person
wanted it,”--she thrust her hand out before him and clenched it,--“my
God, what I could do!”

Fred laughed dismally. “Even in my ashes I feel myself pushing you! How
can anybody help it? My dear girl, can't you see that anybody else who
wanted it as you do would be your rival, your deadliest danger? Can't
you see that it's your great good fortune that other people can't care
about it so much?”

But Thea seemed not to take in his protest at all. She went on
vindicating herself. “It's taken me a long while to do anything, of
course, and I've only begun to see daylight. But anything good
is--expensive. It hasn't seemed long. I've always felt responsible to
you.”

Fred looked at her face intently, through the veil of snowflakes, and
shook his head. “To me? You are a truthful woman, and you don't mean to
lie to me. But after the one responsibility you do feel, I doubt if
you've enough left to feel responsible to God! Still, if you've ever in
an idle hour fooled yourself with thinking I had anything to do with it,
Heaven knows I'm grateful.”

“Even if I'd married Nordquist,” Thea went on, turning down the path
again, “there would have been something left out. There always is. In a
way, I've always been married to you. I'm not very flexible; never was
and never shall be. You caught me young. I could never have that over
again. One can't, after one begins to know anything. But I look back on
it. My life hasn't been a gay one, any more than yours. If I shut things
out from you, you shut them out from me. We've been a help and a
hindrance to each other. I guess it's always that way, the good and the
bad all mixed up. There's only one thing that's all beautiful--and
always beautiful! That's why my interest keeps up.”

“Yes, I know.” Fred looked sidewise at the outline of her head against
the thickening atmosphere. “And you give one the impression that that is
enough. I've gradually, gradually given you up.”

“See, the lights are coming out.” Thea pointed to where they flickered,
flashes of violet through the gray tree-tops. Lower down the globes
along the drives were becoming a pale lemon color. “Yes, I don't see why
anybody wants to marry an artist, anyhow. I remember Ray Kennedy used to
say he didn't see how any woman could marry a gambler, for she would
only be marrying what the game left.” She shook her shoulders
impatiently. “Who marries who is a small matter, after all. But I hope I
can bring back your interest in my work. You've cared longer and more
than anybody else, and I'd like to have somebody human to make a report
to once in a while. You can send me your spear. I'll do my best. If
you're not interested, I'll do my best anyhow. I've only a few friends,
but I can lose every one of them, if it has to be. I learned how to lose
when my mother died.--We must hurry now. My taxi must be waiting.”

The blue light about them was growing deeper and darker, and the falling
snow and the faint trees had become violet. To the south, over Broadway,
there was an orange reflection in the clouds. Motors and carriage lights
flashed by on the drive below the reservoir path, and the air was
strident with horns and shrieks from the whistles of the mounted
policemen.

Fred gave Thea his arm as they descended from the embankment. “I guess
you'll never manage to lose me or Archie, Thea. You do pick up queer
ones. But loving you is a heroic discipline. It wears a man out. Tell me
one thing: could I have kept you, once, if I'd put on every screw?”

Thea hurried him along, talking rapidly, as if to get it over. “You
might have kept me in misery for a while, perhaps. I don't know. I have
to think well of myself, to work. You could have made it hard. I'm not
ungrateful. I was a difficult proposition to deal with. I understand
now, of course. Since you didn't tell me the truth in the beginning, you
couldn't very well turn back after I'd set my head. At least, if you'd
been the sort who could, you wouldn't have had to,--for I'd not have
cared a button for that sort, even then.” She stopped beside a car that
waited at the curb and gave him her hand. “There. We part friends?”

Fred looked at her. “You know. Ten years.”

“I'm not ungrateful,” Thea repeated as she got into her cab.

“Yes,” she reflected, as the taxi cut into the Park carriage road, “we
don't get fairy tales in this world, and he has, after all, cared more
and longer than anybody else.” It was dark outside now, and the light
from the lamps along the drive flashed into the cab. The snowflakes
hovered like swarms of white bees about the globes.

Thea sat motionless in one corner staring out of the window at the cab
lights that wove in and out among the trees, all seeming to be bent upon
joyous courses. Taxicabs were still new in New York, and the theme of
popular minstrelsy. Landry had sung her a ditty he heard in some theater
on Third Avenue, about:

“But there passed him a bright-eyed taxi
With the girl of his heart inside.”

Almost inaudibly Thea began to hum the air, though she was thinking of
something serious, something that had touched her deeply. At the
beginning of the season, when she was not singing often, she had gone
one afternoon to hear Paderewski's recital. In front of her sat an old
German couple, evidently poor people who had made sacrifices to pay for
their excellent seats. Their intelligent enjoyment of the music, and
their friendliness with each other, had interested her more than
anything on the programme. When the pianist began a lovely melody in the
first movement of the Beethoven D minor sonata, the old lady put out her
plump hand and touched her husband's sleeve and they looked at each
other in recognition. They both wore glasses, but such a look! Like
forget-menots, and so full of happy recollections. Thea wanted to put
her arms around them and ask them how they had been able to keep a
feeling like that, like a nosegay in a glass of water.




XI

DR. ARCHIE saw nothing of Thea during the following week. After several
fruitless efforts, he succeeded in getting a word with her over the
telephone, but she sounded so distracted and driven that he was glad to
say good-night and hang up the instrument. There were, she told him,
rehearsals not only for “Walkure,” but also for “Gotterdammerung,” in
which she was to sing WALTRAUTE two weeks later.

On Thursday afternoon Thea got home late, after an exhausting rehearsal.
She was in no happy frame of mind. Madame Necker, who had been very
gracious to her that night when she went on to complete Gloeckler's
performance of SIEGLINDE, had, since Thea was cast to sing the part
instead of Gloeckler in the production of the “Ring,” been chilly and
disapproving, distinctly hostile. Thea had always felt that she and
Necker stood for the same sort of endeavor, and that Necker recognized
it and had a cordial feeling for her. In Germany she had several times
sung BRANGAENA to Necker's ISOLDE, and the older artist had let her know
that she thought she sang it beautifully. It was a bitter disappointment
to find that the approval of so honest an artist as Necker could not
stand the test of any significant recognition by the management. Madame
Necker was forty, and her voice was failing just when her powers were at
their height. Every fresh young voice was an enemy, and this one was
accompanied by gifts which she could not fail to recognize.

Thea had her dinner sent up to her apartment, and it was a very poor
one. She tasted the soup and then indignantly put on her wraps to go out
and hunt a dinner. As she was going to the elevator, she had to admit
that she was behaving foolishly. She took off her hat and coat and
ordered another dinner. When it arrived, it was no better than the
first. There was even a burnt match under the milk toast. She had a sore
throat, which made swallowing painful and boded ill for the morrow.
Although she had been speaking in whispers all day to save her throat,
she now perversely summoned the housekeeper and demanded an account of
some laundry that had been lost. The housekeeper was indifferent and
impertinent, and Thea got angry and scolded violently. She knew it was
very bad for her to get into a rage just before bedtime, and after the
housekeeper left she realized that for ten dollars' worth of
underclothing she had been unfitting herself for a performance which
might eventually mean many thousands. The best thing now was to stop
reproaching herself for her lack of sense, but she was too tired to
control her thoughts.

While she was undressing--Therese was brushing out her SIEGLINDE wig in
the trunk-room--she went on chiding herself bitterly. “And how am I ever
going to get to sleep in this state?” she kept asking herself. “If I
don't sleep, I'll be perfectly worthless to-morrow. I'll go down there
to-morrow and make a fool of myself. If I'd let that laundry alone with
whatever nigger has stolen it--WHY did I undertake to reform the
management of this hotel to-night? After to-morrow I could pack up and
leave the place. There's the Phillamon--I liked the rooms there better,
anyhow--and the Umberto--” She began going over the advantages and
disadvantages of different apartment hotels. Suddenly she checked
herself. “What AM I doing this for? I can't move into another hotel
to-night. I'll keep this up till morning. I shan't sleep a wink.”

Should she take a hot bath, or shouldn't she? Sometimes it relaxed her,
and sometimes it roused her and fairly put her beside herself. Between
the conviction that she must sleep and the fear that she couldn't, she
hung paralyzed. When she looked at her bed, she shrank from it in every
nerve. She was much more afraid of it than she had ever been of the
stage of any opera house. It yawned before her like the sunken road at
Waterloo.

She rushed into her bathroom and locked the door. She would risk the
bath, and defer the encounter with the bed a little longer. She lay in
the bath half an hour. The warmth of the water penetrated to her bones,
induced pleasant reflections and a feeling of well-being. It was very
nice to have Dr. Archie in New York, after all, and to see him get so
much satisfaction out of the little companionship she was able to give
him. She liked people who got on, and who became more interesting as
they grew older. There was Fred; he was much more interesting now than
he had been at thirty. He was intelligent about music, and he must be
very intelligent in his business, or he would not be at the head of the
Brewers' Trust. She respected that kind of intelligence and success. Any
success was good. She herself had made a good start, at any rate, and
now, if she could get to sleep--Yes, they were all more interesting than
they used to be. Look at Harsanyi, who had been so long retarded; what a
place he had made for himself in Vienna. If she could get to sleep, she
would show him something to-morrow that he would understand.

She got quickly into bed and moved about freely between the sheets. Yes,
she was warm all over. A cold, dry breeze was coming in from the river,
thank goodness! She tried to think about her little rock house and the
Arizona sun and the blue sky. But that led to memories which were still
too disturbing. She turned on her side, closed her eyes, and tried an
old device.

She entered her father's front door, hung her hat and coat on the rack,
and stopped in the parlor to warm her hands at the stove. Then she went
out through the diningroom, where the boys were getting their lessons at
the long table; through the sitting-room, where Thor was asleep in his
cot bed, his dress and stocking hanging on a chair. In the kitchen she
stopped for her lantern and her hot brick. She hurried up the back
stairs and through the windy loft to her own glacial room. The illusion
was marred only by the consciousness that she ought to brush her teeth
before she went to bed, and that she never used to do it. Why--? The
water was frozen solid in the pitcher, so she got over that. Once
between the red blankets there was a short, fierce battle with the cold;
then, warmer--warmer. She could hear her father shaking down the
hard-coal burner for the night, and the wind rushing and banging down
the village street. The boughs of the cottonwood, hard as bone, rattled
against her gable. The bed grew softer and warmer. Everybody was warm
and well downstairs. The sprawling old house had gathered them all in,
like a hen, and had settled down over its brood. They were all warm in
her father's house. Softer and softer. She was asleep. She slept ten
hours without turning over. From sleep like that, one awakes in shining
armor.


On Friday afternoon there was an inspiring audience; there was not an
empty chair in the house. Ottenburg and Dr. Archie had seats in the
orchestra circle, got from a ticket broker. Landry had not been able to
get a seat, so he roamed about in the back of the house, where he
usually stood when he dropped in after his own turn in vaudeville was
over. He was there so often and at such irregular hours that the ushers
thought he was a singer's husband, or had something to do with the
electrical plant.

Harsanyi and his wife were in a box, near the stage, in the second
circle. Mrs. Harsanyi's hair was noticeably gray, but her face was
fuller and handsomer than in those early years of struggle, and she was
beautifully dressed. Harsanyi himself had changed very little. He had
put on his best afternoon coat in honor of his pupil, and wore a pearl
in his black ascot. His hair was longer and more bushy than he used to
wear it, and there was now one gray lock on the right side. He had
always been an elegant figure, even when he went about in shabby clothes
and was crushed with work. Before the curtain rose he was restless and
nervous, and kept looking at his watch and wishing he had got a few more
letters off before he left his hotel. He had not been in New York since
the advent of the taxicab, and had allowed himself too much time. His
wife knew that he was afraid of being disappointed this afternoon. He
did not often go to the opera because the stupid things that singers did
vexed him so, and it always put him in a rage if the conductor held the
tempo or in any way accommodated the score to the singer.

When the lights went out and the violins began to quaver their long D
against the rude figure of the basses, Mrs. Harsanyi saw her husband's
fingers fluttering on his knee in a rapid tattoo. At the moment when
SIEGLINDE entered from the side door, she leaned toward him and
whispered in his ear, “Oh, the lovely creature!” But he made no
response, either by voice or gesture. Throughout the first scene he sat
sunk in his chair, his head forward and his one yellow eye rolling
restlessly and shining like a tiger's in the dark. His eye followed
SIEGLINDE about the stage like a satellite, and as she sat at the table
listening to SIEGMUND'S long narrative, it never left her. When she
prepared the sleeping draught and disappeared after HUNDING, Harsanyi
bowed his head still lower and put his hand over his eye to rest it. The
tenor,--a young man who sang with great vigor, went on:--


“WALSE! WALSE! WO IST DEIN SCHWERT?”


Harsanyi smiled, but he did not look forth again until SIEGLINDE
reappeared. She went through the story of her shameful bridal feast and
into the Walhall' music, which she always sang so nobly, and the
entrance of the one-eyed stranger:--

“MIR ALLEIN WECKTE DAS AUGE.”

Mrs. Harsanyi glanced at her husband, wondering whether the singer on
the stage could not feel his commanding glance. On came the CRESCENDO:--


“WAS JE ICH VERLOR, WAS JE ICH BEWEINT WAR' MIR GEWONNEN.”

(All that I have lost, All that I have mourned, Would I then have won.)

Harsanyi touched his wife's arm softly.

Seated in the moonlight, the VOLSUNG pair began their loving inspection
of each other's beauties, and the music born of murmuring sound passed
into her face, as the old poet said,--and into her body as well. Into
one lovely attitude after another the music swept her, love impelled
her. And the voice gave out all that was best in it. Like the spring,
indeed, it blossomed into memories and prophecies, it recounted and it
foretold, as she sang the story of her friendless life, and of how the
thing which was truly herself, “bright as the day, rose to the surface”
 when in the hostile world she for the first time beheld her Friend.
Fervently she rose into the hardier feeling of action and daring, the
pride in hero-strength and hero-blood, until in a splendid burst, tall
and shining like a Victory, she christened him:--

“SIEGMUND--SO NENN ICH DICH!”


Her impatience for the sword swelled with her anticipation of his act,
and throwing her arms above her head, she fairly tore a sword out of the
empty air for him, before NOTHUNG had left the tree. IN HOCHSTER
TRUNKENHEIT, indeed, she burst out with the flaming cry of their
kinship: “If you are SIEGMUND, I am SIEGLINDE!” Laughing, singing,
bounding, exulting,--with their passion and their sword,--the VOLSUNGS
ran out into the spring night.

As the curtain fell, Harsanyi turned to his wife. “At last,” he sighed,
“somebody with ENOUGH! Enough voice and talent and beauty, enough
physical power. And such a noble, noble style!”

“I can scarcely believe it, Andor. I can see her now, that clumsy girl,
hunched up over your piano. I can see her shoulders. She always seemed
to labor so with her back. And I shall never forget that night when you
found her voice.”

The audience kept up its clamor until, after many reappearances with the
tenor, Kronborg came before the curtain alone. The house met her with a
roar, a greeting that was almost savage in its fierceness. The singer's
eyes, sweeping the house, rested for a moment on Harsanyi, and she waved
her long sleeve toward his box.

“She OUGHT to be pleased that you are here,” said Mrs. Harsanyi. “I
wonder if she knows how much she owes to you.”

“She owes me nothing,” replied her husband quickly. “She paid her way.
She always gave something back, even then.”

“I remember you said once that she would do nothing common,” said Mrs.
Harsanyi thoughtfully.

“Just so. She might fail, die, get lost in the pack. But if she
achieved, it would be nothing common. There are people whom one can
trust for that. There is one way in which they will never fail.”
 Harsanyi retired into his own reflections.

After the second act Fred Ottenburg brought Archie to the Harsanyis' box
and introduced him as an old friend of Miss Kronborg. The head of a
musical publishing house joined them, bringing with him a journalist and
the president of a German singing society. The conversation was chiefly
about the new SIEGLINDE. Mrs. Harsanyi was gracious and enthusiastic,
her husband nervous and uncommunicative. He smiled mechanically, and
politely answered questions addressed to him. “Yes, quite so.” “Oh,
certainly.” Every one, of course, said very usual things with great
conviction. Mrs. Harsanyi was used to hearing and uttering the
commonplaces which such occasions demanded. When her husband withdrew
into the shadow, she covered his retreat by her sympathy and cordiality.
In reply to a direct question from Ottenburg, Harsanyi said, flinching,
“ISOLDE? Yes, why not? She will sing all the great roles, I should
think.”

The chorus director said something about “dramatic temperament.” The
journalist insisted that it was “explosive force,” “projecting power.”

Ottenburg turned to Harsanyi. “What is it, Mr. Harsanyi? Miss Kronborg
says if there is anything in her, you are the man who can say what it
is.”

The journalist scented copy and was eager. “Yes, Harsanyi. You know all
about her. What's her secret?”

Harsanyi rumpled his hair irritably and shrugged his shoulders. “Her
secret? It is every artist's secret,”--he waved his hand,--“passion.
That is all. It is an open secret, and perfectly safe. Like heroism, it
is inimitable in cheap materials.”

The lights went out. Fred and Archie left the box as the second act came
on.

Artistic growth is, more than it is anything else, a refining of the
sense of truthfulness. The stupid believe that to be truthful is easy;
only the artist, the great artist, knows how difficult it is. That
afternoon nothing new came to Thea Kronborg, no enlightenment, no
inspiration. She merely came into full possession of things she had been
refining and perfecting for so long. Her inhibitions chanced to be fewer
than usual, and, within herself, she entered into the inheritance that
she herself had laid up, into the fullness of the faith she had kept
before she knew its name or its meaning.

Often when she sang, the best she had was unavailable; she could not
break through to it, and every sort of distraction and mischance came
between it and her. But this afternoon the closed roads opened, the
gates dropped. What she had so often tried to reach, lay under her hand.
She had only to touch an idea to make it live.

While she was on the stage she was conscious that every movement was the
right movement, that her body was absolutely the instrument of her idea.
Not for nothing had she kept it so severely, kept it filled with such
energy and fire. All that deep-rooted vitality flowered in her voice,
her face, in her very finger-tips. She felt like a tree bursting into
bloom. And her voice was as flexible as her body; equal to any demand,
capable of every NUANCE. With the sense of its perfect companionship,
its entire trustworthiness, she had been able to throw herself into the
dramatic exigencies of the part, everything in her at its best and
everything working together.

The third act came on, and the afternoon slipped by. Thea Kronborg's
friends, old and new, seated about the house on different floors and
levels, enjoyed her triumph according to their natures. There was one
there, whom nobody knew, who perhaps got greater pleasure out of that
afternoon than Harsanyi himself. Up in the top gallery a gray-haired
little Mexican, withered and bright as a string of peppers beside a'dobe
door, kept praying and cursing under his breath, beating on the brass
railing and shouting “Bravo! Bravo!” until he was repressed by his
neighbors.

He happened to be there because a Mexican band was to be a feature of
Barnum and Bailey's circus that year. One of the managers of the show
had traveled about the Southwest, signing up a lot of Mexican musicians
at low wages, and had brought them to New York. Among them was Spanish
Johnny. After Mrs. Tellamantez died, Johnny abandoned his trade and went
out with his mandolin to pick up a living for one. His irregularities
had become his regular mode of life.

When Thea Kronborg came out of the stage entrance on Fortieth Street,
the sky was still flaming with the last rays of the sun that was sinking
off behind the North River. A little crowd of people was lingering about
the door--musicians from the orchestra who were waiting for their
comrades, curious young men, and some poorly dressed girls who were
hoping to get a glimpse of the singer. She bowed graciously to the
group, through her veil, but she did not look to the right or left as
she crossed the sidewalk to her cab. Had she lifted her eyes an instant
and glanced out through her white scarf, she must have seen the only man
in the crowd who had removed his hat when she emerged, and who stood
with it crushed up in his hand. And she would have known him, changed as
he was. His lustrous black hair was full of gray, and his face was a
good deal worn by the EXTASI, so that it seemed to have shrunk away from
his shining eyes and teeth and left them too prominent. But she would
have known him. She passed so near that he could have touched her, and
he did not put on his hat until her taxi had snorted away. Then he
walked down Broadway with his hands in his overcoat pockets, wearing a
smile which embraced all the stream of life that passed him and the
lighted towers that rose into the limpid blue of the evening sky. If the
singer, going home exhausted in her cab, was wondering what was the good
of it all, that smile, could she have seen it, would have answered her.
It is the only commensurate answer.


Here we must leave Thea Kronborg. From this time on the story of her
life is the story of her achievement. The growth of an artist is an
intellectual and spiritual development which can scarcely be followed in
a personal narrative. This story attempts to deal only with the simple
and concrete beginnings which color and accent an artist's work, and to
give some account of how a Moonstone girl found her way out of a vague,
easy-going world into a life of disciplined endeavor. Any account of the
loyalty of young hearts to some exalted ideal, and the passion with
which they strive, will always, in some of us, rekindle generous
emotions.




EPILOGUE

MOONSTONE again, in the year 1909. The Methodists are giving an
ice-cream sociable in the grove about the new court-house. It is a warm
summer night of full moon. The paper lanterns which hang among the trees
are foolish toys, only dimming, in little lurid circles, the great
softness of the lunar light that floods the blue heavens and the high
plateau. To the east the sand hills shine white as of old, but the
empire of the sand is gradually diminishing. The grass grows thicker
over the dunes than it used to, and the streets of the town are harder
and firmer than they were twenty-five years ago. The old inhabitants
will tell you that sandstorms are infrequent now, that the wind blows
less persistently in the spring and plays a milder tune. Cultivation has
modified the soil and the climate, as it modifies human life.

The people seated about under the cottonwoods are much smarter than the
Methodists we used to know. The interior of the new Methodist Church
looks like a theater, with a sloping floor, and as the congregation
proudly say, “opera chairs.” The matrons who attend to serving the
refreshments to-night look younger for their years than did the women of
Mrs. Kronborg's time, and the children all look like city children. The
little boys wear “Buster Browns” and the little girls Russian blouses.
The country child, in made-overs and cut-downs, seems to have vanished
from the face of the earth.

At one of the tables, with her Dutch-cut twin boys, sits a fair-haired,
dimpled matron who was once Lily Fisher. Her husband is president of the
new bank, and she “goes East for her summers,” a practice which causes
envy and discontent among her neighbors. The twins are well-behaved
children, biddable, meek, neat about their clothes, and always mindful
of the proprieties they have learned at summer hotels. While they are
eating their icecream and trying not to twist the spoon in their mouths,
a little shriek of laughter breaks from an adjacent table. The twins
look up. There sits a spry little old spinster whom they know well. She
has a long chin, a long nose, and she is dressed like a young girl, with
a pink sash and a lace garden hat with pink rosebuds. She is surrounded
by a crowd of boys,--loose and lanky, short and thick,--who are joking
with her roughly, but not unkindly.

“Mamma,” one of the twins comes out in a shrill treble, “why is Tillie
Kronborg always talking about a thousand dollars?”

The boys, hearing this question, break into a roar of laughter, the
women titter behind their paper napkins, and even from Tillie there is a
little shriek of appreciation. The observing child's remark had made
every one suddenly realize that Tillie never stopped talking about that
particular sum of money. In the spring, when she went to buy early
strawberries, and was told that they were thirty cents a box, she was
sure to remind the grocer that though her name was Kronborg she didn't
get a thousand dollars a night. In the autumn, when she went to buy her
coal for the winter, she expressed amazement at the price quoted her,
and told the dealer he must have got her mixed up with her niece to
think she could pay such a sum. When she was making her Christmas
presents, she never failed to ask the women who came into her shop what
you COULD make for anybody who got a thousand dollars a night. When the
Denver papers announced that Thea Kronborg had married Frederick
Ottenburg, the head of the Brewers' Trust, Moonstone people expected
that Tillie's vain-gloriousness would take another form. But Tillie had
hoped that Thea would marry a title, and she did not boast much about
Ottenburg,--at least not until after her memorable trip to Kansas City
to hear Thea sing.

Tillie is the last Kronborg left in Moonstone. She lives alone in a
little house with a green yard, and keeps a fancywork and millinery
store. Her business methods are informal, and she would never come out
even at the end of the year, if she did not receive a draft for a good
round sum from her niece at Christmas time. The arrival of this draft
always renews the discussion as to what Thea would do for her aunt if
she really did the right thing. Most of the Moonstone people think Thea
ought to take Tillie to New York and keep her as a companion. While they
are feeling sorry for Tillie because she does not live at the Plaza,
Tillie is trying not to hurt their feelings by showing too plainly how
much she realizes the superiority of her position. She tries to be
modest when she complains to the postmaster that her New York paper is
more than three days late. It means enough, surely, on the face of it,
that she is the only person in Moonstone who takes a New York paper or
who has any reason for taking one. A foolish young girl, Tillie lived in
the splendid sorrows of “Wanda” and “Strathmore”; a foolish old girl,
she lives in her niece's triumphs. As she often says, she just missed
going on the stage herself.

That night after the sociable, as Tillie tripped home with a crowd of
noisy boys and girls, she was perhaps a shade troubled. The twin's
question rather lingered in her ears. Did she, perhaps, insist too much
on that thousand dollars? Surely, people didn't for a minute think it
was the money she cared about? As for that, Tillie tossed her head, she
didn't care a rap. They must understand that this money was different.

When the laughing little group that brought her home had gone weaving
down the sidewalk through the leafy shadows and had disappeared, Tillie
brought out a rocking chair and sat down on her porch. On glorious, soft
summer nights like this, when the moon is opulent and full, the day
submerged and forgotten, she loves to sit there behind her rose-vine and
let her fancy wander where it will. If you chanced to be passing down
that Moonstone street and saw that alert white figure rocking there
behind the screen of roses and lingering late into the night, you might
feel sorry for her, and how mistaken you would be! Tillie lives in a
little magic world, full of secret satisfactions. Thea Kronborg has
given much noble pleasure to a world that needs all it can get, but to
no individual has she given more than to her queer old aunt in
Moonstone. The legend of Kronborg, the artist, fills Tillie's life; she
feels rich and exalted in it. What delightful things happen in her mind
as she sits there rocking! She goes back to those early days of sand and
sun, when Thea was a child and Tillie was herself, so it seems to her,
“young.” When she used to hurry to church to hear Mr. Kronborg's
wonderful sermons, and when Thea used to stand up by the organ of a
bright Sunday morning and sing “Come, Ye Disconsolate.” Or she thinks
about that wonderful time when the Metropolitan Opera Company sang a
week's engagement in Kansas City, and Thea sent for her and had her stay
with her at the Coates House and go to every performance at Convention
Hall. Thea let Tillie go through her costume trunks and try on her wigs
and jewels. And the kindness of Mr. Ottenburg! When Thea dined in her
own room, he went down to dinner with Tillie, and never looked bored or
absent-minded when she chattered. He took her to the hall the first time
Thea sang there, and sat in the box with her and helped her through
“Lohengrin.” After the first act, when Tillie turned tearful eyes to him
and burst out, “I don't care, she always seemed grand like that, even
when she was a girl. I expect I'm crazy, but she just seems to me full
of all them old times!”--Ottenburg was so sympathetic and patted her
hand and said, “But that's just what she is, full of the old times, and
you are a wise woman to see it.” Yes, he said that to her. Tillie often
wondered how she had been able to bear it when Thea came down the stairs
in the wedding robe embroidered in silver, with a train so long it took
six women to carry it.

Tillie had lived fifty-odd years for that week, but she got it, and no
miracle was ever more miraculous than that. When she used to be working
in the fields on her father's Minnesota farm, she couldn't help
believing that she would some day have to do with the “wonderful,”
 though her chances for it had then looked so slender.

The morning after the sociable, Tillie, curled up in bed, was roused by
the rattle of the milk cart down the street. Then a neighbor boy came
down the sidewalk outside her window, singing “Casey Jones” as if he
hadn't a care in the world. By this time Tillie was wide awake. The
twin's question, and the subsequent laughter, came back with a faint
twinge. Tillie knew she was short-sighted about facts, but this
time--Why, there were her scrapbooks, full of newspaper and magazine
articles about Thea, and half-tone cuts, snap-shots of her on land and
sea, and photographs of her in all her parts. There, in her parlor, was
the phonograph that had come from Mr. Ottenburg last June, on Thea's
birthday; she had only to go in there and turn it on, and let Thea speak
for herself. Tillie finished brushing her white hair and laughed as she
gave it a smart turn and brought it into her usual French twist. If
Moonstone doubted, she had evidence enough: in black and white, in
figures and photographs, evidence in hair lines on metal disks. For one
who had so often seen two and two as making six, who had so often
stretched a point, added a touch, in the good game of trying to make the
world brighter than it is, there was positive bliss in having such deep
foundations of support. She need never tremble in secret lest she might
sometime stretch a point in Thea's favor.--Oh, the comfort, to a soul
too zealous, of having at last a rose so red it could not be further
painted, a lily so truly auriferous that no amount of gilding could
exceed the fact!

Tillie hurried from her bedroom, threw open the doors and windows, and
let the morning breeze blow through her little house.

In two minutes a cob fire was roaring in her kitchen stove, in five she
had set the table. At her household work Tillie was always bursting out
with shrill snatches of song, and as suddenly stopping, right in the
middle of a phrase, as if she had been struck dumb. She emerged upon the
back porch with one of these bursts, and bent down to get her butter and
cream out of the ice-box. The cat was purring on the bench and the
morning-glories were thrusting their purple trumpets in through the
lattice-work in a friendly way. They reminded Tillie that while she was
waiting for the coffee to boil she could get some flowers for her
breakfast table. She looked out uncertainly at a bush of sweet-briar
that grew at the edge of her yard, off across the long grass and the
tomato vines. The front porch, to be sure, was dripping with crimson
ramblers that ought to be cut for the good of the vines; but never the
rose in the hand for Tillie! She caught up the kitchen shears and off
she dashed through grass and drenching dew. Snip, snip; the
short-stemmed sweet-briars, salmon-pink and golden-hearted, with their
unique and inimitable woody perfume, fell into her apron.

After she put the eggs and toast on the table, Tillie took last Sunday's
New York paper from the rack beside the cupboard and sat down, with it
for company. In the Sunday paper there was always a page about singers,
even in summer, and that week the musical page began with a sympathetic
account of Madame Kronborg's first performance of ISOLDE in London. At
the end of the notice, there was a short paragraph about her having sung
for the King at Buckingham Palace and having been presented with a jewel
by His Majesty.

Singing for the King; but Goodness! she was always doing things like
that! Tillie tossed her head. All through breakfast she kept sticking
her sharp nose down into the glass of sweet-briar, with the old
incredible lightness of heart, like a child's balloon tugging at its
string. She had always insisted, against all evidence, that life was
full of fairy tales, and it was! She had been feeling a little down,
perhaps, and Thea had answered her, from so far. From a common person,
now, if you were troubled, you might get a letter. But Thea almost never
wrote letters. She answered every one, friends and foes alike, in one
way, her own way, her only way. Once more Tillie has to remind herself
that it is all true, and is not something she has “made up.” Like all
romancers, she is a little terrified at seeing one of her wildest
conceits admitted by the hardheaded world. If our dream comes true, we
are almost afraid to believe it; for that is the best of all good
fortune, and nothing better can happen to any of us.

When the people on Sylvester Street tire of Tillie's stories, she goes
over to the east part of town, where her legends are always welcome. The
humbler people of Moonstone still live there. The same little houses sit
under the cottonwoods; the men smoke their pipes in the front doorways,
and the women do their washing in the back yard. The older women
remember Thea, and how she used to come kicking her express wagon along
the sidewalk, steering by the tongue and holding Thor in her lap. Not
much happens in that part of town, and the people have long memories. A
boy grew up on one of those streets who went to Omaha and built up a
great business, and is now very rich. Moonstone people always speak of
him and Thea together, as examples of Moonstone enterprise. They do,
however, talk oftener of Thea. A voice has even a wider appeal than a
fortune. It is the one gift that all creatures would possess if they
could. Dreary Maggie Evans, dead nearly twenty years, is still
remembered because Thea sang at her funeral “after she had studied in
Chicago.”

However much they may smile at her, the old inhabitants would miss
Tillie. Her stories give them something to talk about and to conjecture
about, cut off as they are from the restless currents of the world. The
many naked little sandbars which lie between Venice and the mainland, in
the seemingly stagnant water of the lagoons, are made habitable and
wholesome only because, every night, a foot and a half of tide creeps in
from the sea and winds its fresh brine up through all that network of
shining waterways. So, into all the little settlements of quiet people,
tidings of what their boys and girls are doing in the world bring real
refreshment; bring to the old, memories, and to the young, dreams.

THE END





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Song of the Lark, by Willa Cather

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SONG OF THE LARK ***

***** This file should be named 44-0.txt or 44-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/44/

Produced by Judith Boss and Marvin Peterson

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
